TuskFlow: An E!icient Graph Database for Long-Running
Transactions
Georgios Theodorakis∗
NVIDIA
gtheodorakis@nvidia.com

Hugo Firth

Neo4j
hugo.!rth@neo4j.com

Natacha Crooks

James Clarkson

Neo4j
james.clarkson@neo4j.com

Jim Webber

UC Berkeley
ncrooks@berkeley.edu

Neo4j
jim.webber@neo4j.com

ABSTRACT
Mammoth transactions, which involve long-running operations
that access many items, are common in graph workloads. Graph analytics tasks, including pattern matching and graph algorithms, can
generate large read-write operations that impact signi!cant portions of data, which makes their execution challenging under strict
isolation guarantees. Consequently, we face an apparent trade-o"
between ensuring high isolation and achieving high performance,
forcing users to choose between the two.
In this work, we present T!"#F$%&, an experimental graph database based on Neo4j, designed to e#ciently handle mammoth transactions on graphs (the technique is applicable to other models such
as relational) while maintaining existing transactional semantics.
T!"#F$%& employs a deterministic protocol that safely reorders
regular transactions around mammoths within an epoch. Our protocol supports parallel mammoth execution inspired by graph-parallel
algorithms. To minimize con$icts with regular transactions, T!"#’
F$%& introduces query- and workload-aware optimizations, including graph entity tagging and partitioning. Our experiments
demonstrate that, unlike traditional protocols like two-phase locking or MVCC, T!"#F$%& avoids blocking write transactions and
improves tail latency by up to 45→.

Figure 1: Existing systems cannot handle mammoths blocking short-lived write transactions
systems allow users to model complex, highly associative data
with high-!delity as nodes and relationships. Common use cases
include route planning [82], social networks [9, 80], and retrievalaugmented generation (RAG) for AI applications [44]. While these
systems can handle trillion-scale graphs with high transactional
performance [53, 75], long-running read-write transactions, known
as mammoths [18], can severely impact overall execution.
Very large transactions can challenge any DBMS. In traditional
workloads, the problem of handling mammoths remains only partially solved [18]. Separating workloads into OLAP (long-running,
read-only) and OLTP (short and write-heavy) [40] – as adopted
in production systems from Alibaba [45, 84], Google [26, 49], or
Facebook [64] – helps avoid contention but introduces operational
complexity and causes analytics to run on stale data. The move
to HTAP systems [6, 7, 15, 75] allows some consolidation where
read-only analytical and short read-write transactions can co-exist.
Mammoths are particularly prevalent in graph databases, where
tasks like graph pattern matching [35], graph algorithms such as
community detection and degree centrality [51], cascading deletes,
and schema changes [21, 61] are routine but can con$ict with other
operations. These tasks read from and often write to large parts of
the graph, blocking the progress of many short-lived transactions
and signi!cantly degrading system performance.
To illustrate the widespread nature of the problem, Fig. 1 compares the throughput of Neo4j (using two-phase locking, or 2PL [11])
and Postgres (using MVCC [10]) under a workload of 100 clients.

PVLDB Reference Format:
Georgios Theodorakis, Hugo Firth, James Clarkson, Natacha Crooks,
and Jim Webber. TuskFlow: An E#cient Graph Database for Long-Running
Transactions. PVLDB, 18(12): 4777 - 4790, 2025.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750603
PVLDB Artifact Availability:
The source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available at
https://github.com/Neo4jResearch/TuskFlow.

1

INTRODUCTION

Commercial graph database management systems (DBMSs) [2, 50,
52, 74] are rapidly growing in popularity, with the graph database market projected to reach $5.1 billion by 2026 [27]. These
∗ Work done while at Neo4j.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view a copy of
this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain permission by
emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to the VLDB Endowment.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 18, No. 12 ISSN 2150-8097.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750603

4777

Each client performs read or write transactions sequentially – each
new transaction starts only after the previous one !nishes – using
a randomly chosen relationship from the WikiTalk dataset (see Table 1). When one mammoth transaction begins to update a property
present in all relationships (marked by the dashed vertical line),
both systems show zero throughput, as all write transactions are
blocked, preventing clients from making progress. In addition, the
tail latency for short-lived transactions spikes to over 30 s, orders
of magnitude higher than the expected (millisecond latency). For
larger graphs, the problem worsens as the queuing of con$icting
short-lived transactions can lead to time-outs. Moreover, mammoth
transactions can cause page cache pollution, further increasing the
latency of the blocked transactions.
Vanilla optimistic protocol implementations always abort the
mammoth when attempting to commit due to con$icts with shortlived writes [18], meaning that mammoths will always fail. Pessimistic protocols like 2PL block all transactions, and deterministic
protocols were not designed for handling such workloads [46].
An alternative to the limitations of existing concurrency protocols would be to forgo strong isolation guarantees and transactional
semantics. For example, Neo4j’s and MemGraph’s graph algorithm
libraries [50, 56] allow users to run expensive algorithms without
isolation guarantees when writing results back to the database.
This forces users to either manually maintain consistency or accept
weaker guarantees, which has numerous downsides [81].
Based on our experience at Neo4j, mammoth transactions are
frequent enough in graph use cases to motivate research into a
solution, and our working hypothesis is that both graphs and their
workloads can be part of that solution. Our goal is to design and implement a transactional graph DBMS that addresses the challenges
posed by workloads containing mammoth transactions. Speci!cally,
we aim to: (i) ensure mammoths complete successfully; (ii) prevent
mammoths from blocking short-lived transactions whenever possible; (iii) maintain high throughput and low latency for short-lived
transactions; and (iv) provide strong transactional guarantees (e.g.,
serializability). Our contributions are:
(i) Deterministic concurrency protocol. We introduce the !rst
deterministic protocol designed to handle mammoth transactions
that allows short-lived transactions to be reordered before or after
mammoths’ e"ects rather than blocking them for the entire duration. By extending the Aria protocol [46], we manage transactions
without prior knowledge of their read/write sets while ensuring
con$ict serializability (i.e., equivalent to running serially).
(ii) Query- and workload-aware optimizations. To accelerate
con$ict resolution for short-lived transactions, we introduce graph
entity tagging and graph partitioning. By tagging graph entities and
labels that a mammoth transaction will access before it executes,
we can reduce unnecessary con$icts. Additionally, partitioning the
graph into "hot" and "cold" communities based on the most popular
nodes and access patterns accelerates mammoth execution and
minimizes con$icts with short-lived transactions.
(iii) Pluggable and parallel mammoth execution. We integrate
our protocol into the transaction scheduling module of a graph
database to allow the parallel execution of mammoths, mirroring
how graph-parallel algorithms are implemented. Here, we note that

the protocol can be adapted to relational databases by substituting
nodes and relationships with tables and graph traversals with joins.
Building on these ideas, we developed T!"#F$%&, an experimental in-memory transactional graph database based on Neo4j,
designed to handle mammoth transactions e#ciently without sacri!cing correctness or performance. Our experiments demonstrate
that T!"#F$%& improves throughput and tail latency for shortlived transactions by an order of magnitude compared to traditional
methods like 2PL or MVCC, as shown in Fig. 1. Furthermore, our
micro-benchmarks con!rm that graph tagging and partitioning
techniques both reduce con$icts and lower tail latency by 3.5 to
11.5→ in the presence of mammoth transactions.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: we begin with a short survey of state-of-the-art graph DBMSs, transaction protocols, graph partitioning algorithms, and mammoth use
cases (Sec. 2). We then introduce our deterministic concurrency protocol (Sec. 3) and con$ict resolution techniques (Sec. 4). T!"#F$%&’s
design is discussed in Sec. 5, followed by our evaluation (Sec. 6).
We !nish with related work (Sec. 7), and conclusions (Sec. 8).

2

BACKGROUND

This section covers the foundational concepts of graphs, transactions, and mammoths relevant to the rest of the paper.

2.1

Graph Data Model

In this work, we adopt the labeled property graph (LPG) model [62],
in which nodes may have optional labels and are connected by
named, directed relationships. Both nodes and relationships can
store key-value pairs, known as properties. Similar to Cypher [35],
we de!ne an LPG as a tuple 𝐿 = ↑𝑀 , 𝑁, 𝑂𝑃𝑄, 𝑅𝑆𝑅, 𝑇, 𝑈, 𝑉↓, where 𝑀 is
the set of nodes 𝑊, and 𝑁 is the set of relationships 𝑃 . The function
𝑂𝑃𝑄 maps relationships to source nodes, while 𝑅𝑆𝑅 maps relationships
to target nodes. 𝑇 is a !nite partial function that assigns properties
to nodes or relationships, 𝑈 maps nodes to a !nite (or empty) set of
labels, and 𝑉 assigns a relationship type to each relationship. Nodes,
relationships, and property keys have unique identi!ers. Property
values can be strings, primitive data types, or arrays, while labels
and relationship types are represented as strings.

2.2

Graph Databases and Analytics

MemGraph [50], Neo4j [52], Neptune [2], and TigerGraph [74]
are graph databases designed to support OLTP workloads over
LPGs. They typically perform well for small transaction sizes and
o"er Read Committed or Snapshot Isolation. By contrast, analytical
graph engines like Pregel [48], Giraph [19], and GraphX [83] are
optimized for long-running OLAP queries on (predominantly) static
graphs and do not support writes.
To bridge the operational gap between OLTP and OLAP workloads, graph algorithm libraries built on top of graph DBMSs [50, 56]
permit writing the results of long-running computations (over
graph snapshots) back to the database. However, this approach
sacri!ces transactional guarantees, potentially compromising the
correctness of applications.
Ideally, these computations would run within mammoth transactions, but current systems struggle to maintain good performance
at practical isolation levels, making such integration challenging.

4778

Q0: Compute the degree
centrality of all messages

MATCH (n: Message ) -[ r ] -()
WITH n , COUNT (r) AS degreeCentrality
SET n. degreeCentrality = degreeCentrality

2.3

Transaction decomposition and specialized protocols for
mammoths. One approach to managing long-running transactions [38] is to divide them into smaller units. With nested transactions [22, 47], systems can independently commit or abort these
units, known as subtransactions. Decomposition of this nature can
improve concurrency and reduce retries by utilizing savepoints [60],
but it can also perform poorly under high load [20]. Sagas [36] also
decompose long-running transactions into smaller requests but
require applications to provide compensating transactions for recovery, adding signi!cant overhead for graph traversals whose
updates may be large and complex. Finally, modern distributed
databases use specialized protocols [21, 61] to manage mammoths,
like schema changes or large-scale deletes. However, these protocols often rely on speci!c consistency models that do not apply to
all transactions and may lack certain guarantees.
Deterministic databases [1, 71] provide serializable guarantees
(i.e., the results of concurrent transactions are equivalent to those
of a serial execution) and ensure that the re-execution of a set of
transactions will always yield the same database state. Calvin [72]
achieves this through a two-phase process: !rst, it locks data and
analyzes dependencies for con$icts based on a predetermined order;
then, transactions are executed in parallel. Aria [46], another deterministic protocol, also employs two-phase execution but does not
require pre-de!ned read-write sets. In Aria, transactions reserve
reads and writes concurrently in the !rst phase, while con$icts are
detected and commit decisions are made in the second phase, all
without coordination. While these protocols prevent rollbacks, they
su"er from signi!cant performance degradation when handling
long-running transactions [46], as other transactions are blocked
until the mammoths complete within an epoch. They also incur
higher latency due to synchronization between phases and stricter
isolation levels than Read Committed or Snapshot Isolation.

2.4

Person

Person
knows

Message

Person

Person

is_author_of

Message

Message

has_tag

Tag

Tag

is_author_of

Message

Min depth

Max depth

reply_of

Figure 3: Mammoth queries over LDBC social network
classi!cation [18], mammoths fall into two categories: (i) balanced,
with nearly equal read and write sets; and (ii) unbalanced, where
reads signi!cantly outweigh writes.
High-level graph query languages like Cypher [35] and GQL [30]
abstract the complexity of graph operations and the high graph
connectivity such that seemingly simple queries might trigger mammoths. For example, the Cypher query 𝑍0 in Fig. 2 uses MATCH to retrieve all Message-labeled nodes and their relationships in the LDBC
social network [31, 67], counts these relationships for each node
and updates the degreeCentrality property with SET. Although
this query is not computationally intensive – relying on neighborhood metadata – it still blocks write transactions. Unlike relational databases with localized transactions on indexed tables,
graph databases face unique concurrency challenges from traversalheavy workloads and supernodes (nodes with many neighbors),
which amplify contention and exacerbate the problem.
Fig. 3 illustrates two more examples of mammoth transactions
over the social network, where the red dashed lines indicate graph
entities being updated. Drawing from the Business Intelligence (BI)
workload [67] of LDBC (OLAP queries), we adapted two existing operations to include writes to better re$ect our experience with real
mammoth transactions. In 𝑍1, the weight of interactions between
nodes labeled as Person is calculated and written back to the knows
relationships. An interaction is de!ned as a direct Comment on a
Message between two people. For the LBDC benchmark, this step is
typically part of the pre-computation for BI-19 and BI-20 queries;
for our mammoth use cases, we execute it alongside short-lived
read-write transactions in Sec. 6.
𝑍2 is a variation of the BI-10 query, which identi!es experts
within a person’s social network sharing common interests (represented by the Tag nodes linked to their Messages). The social clique
is speci!ed by a depth range. Our extension adds operations to update each identi!ed expert at the transaction’s end. Consequently,
we classify 𝑍0 and 𝑍1 as balanced mammoths, while 𝑍2 is unbalanced. All three mammoth queries are representative of real-world
use cases encountered at Neo4j.

Graph Partitioning Algorithms

Graph partitioning [58] aims to create 𝑋 disjoint but complete graph
partitions 𝑌 = 𝑌1, ..., 𝑌𝐿 that minimize a given cost function (e.g.,
edge-cut) while satisfying speci!c balancing constraints [41, 66, 78].
We focus on node partitioning [3], where each node 𝑊 ↔ 𝑀 is assigned to a unique partition 𝑌𝑀 . While existing systems use partitioning to reduce communication overhead in graph analytics, we apply
this technique to resolve con$icts between mammoth and shortlived transactions. Speci!cally, we use query- and workload-aware
techniques [33, 34], like pattern matching, for OLTP workloads. Our
goal is to improve workload-sensitive partition stability [28, 29, 33]
by reducing inter-partition traversals for a given workload.

2.5

Person

Q1: Compute weights over
knows relationship based on
comments of known persons

Transaction Protocols

knows*

knows*

Message

Figure 2: Compute degree centrality with Cypher (LDBC Q0)

Q2: Find experts with common
interests (write-back the results)

3

DETERMINISTIC MAMMOTH EXECUTION

Mammoth transactions, which perform read-write operations across
a large portion of a graph, often con$ict with short-lived transactions, causing them to abort or block. This issue occurs due to
unpredictable access patterns, as nodes have varying numbers of
relationships (e.g., power-law distribution). We believe, however,
that we can do better than existing systems by monitoring and

Mammoth Use Cases

Let us introduce a set of typical use cases for mammoth transactions
that set the context for the remainder of the paper. Following a prior

4779

analyzing runtime contention. This approach would enable us to
identify when concurrent operations can safely proceed in parallel with the mammoth without blocking. Intuitively, this involves
checking that an operation does not compromise serializability.
Speci!cally, we aim to ensure each short-lived transaction executes
fully either before or after the mammoth in the serialization graph.
Assumptions. Our approach relies on several key assumptions:
(i) the system runs only one mammoth at a time,1 alongside many
short-lived transactions; (ii) mammoths may be slow without strict
performance requirements, while short-lived transactions expect
millisecond-level latency; (iii) mammoths should deterministically
commit, meaning they do not abort due to integrity constraints;
(iv) once a mammoth leaves a graph region, it cannot re-enter;
(v) short-lived transactions see either previously committed changes
by the mammoth or data it has not yet or will not ever access; and
(vi) users specify if a transaction is a mammoth.2 The goal is to
complete mammoths e#ciently while ensuring high throughput,
low latency, and transactional guarantees for regular transactions.
Assumptions (i)-(iii) align with typical customer workloads, while
(iv)-(vi) simplify the transactional protocol. We now provide its
high-level overview.
Protocol overview. To facilitate dependency tracking in highly
dynamic graphs, we extend deterministic protocols for mammoths.
We chose Aria [46], which ensures con$ict serializability without
requiring the transactions’ read-write sets in advance. Aria assigns
each transaction a unique transaction identi!er (TID) using a sequencing layer. TIDs are used to resolve con$icts deterministically.
All transactions are processed in parallel, in any order, over two
phases within an epoch: local execution and commit. In the execution phase (Sec. 3.1), each transaction reads from the current
database snapshot, makes reservations, and stores writes locally. In
the commit phase (Sec. 3.2), transactions use the reservations to independently commit or abort based on TIDs. The transactions with
Write-After-Write (WAW), Read-After-Write (RAW), or mammoth
con$icts are aborted and rescheduled in the next epoch. Short-lived
transactions cannot abort the mammoth.
To support mammoths without delaying epochs [46] or increasing latency for short-lived transactions, we split them into smaller
tasks with a set number of operations per epoch (i.e., budget).
These tasks access localized graph areas and the protocol reorders
short-lived transactions around them – either before or after the
mammoth – preserving dependencies to detect con$icts. As the
mammoth traverses di"erent graph regions, these regions transition through mammoth states (discussed in Sec. 3.2) until they are
marked VISITED, ensuring they are not accessed again. This strategy signi!cantly increases concurrency, allowing all transactions
to make progress.

3.1

Algorithm 1: Execution and commit protocols
1 Function ExecuteTx(tx, db):
2
if tx.type == EXECUTE_LOCALLY then
3
RunLocally(tx, db)
4
tx.type ↗ RUN_ON_DB
5
Schedule tx for commit phase
6

else

// Reschedule failed short-lived transactions and the
mammoth if it has more work
7
if TryToRunOnDatabase(tx, db) == false or (tx.isMammoth and
tx.hasFinished == false) then
8
tx.type ↗ EXECUTE_LOCALLY
9
Schedule tx for execution phase
10 Function RunLocally(tx, db):
11
Read from the latest db snapshot
12
Execute locally (mammoths use a budget) and reserve R/Ws in tx.RWSet
// type is the record type and rid the record id
13 Function ReserveRead(tx, type, rid, db):
14
db.reservationTable[type].mergeRead(rid, tx.epoch, tx.tid)
15 Function ReserveWrite(tx, type, rid, db):
16
db.reservationTable[type].mergeWrite(rid, tx.epoch, tx.tid)
17 Function ReserveMammothRead(tx):
18
db.reservationTable[type].mergeMammothRead(rid, tx.epoch, tx.state)
19 Function ReserveMammothWrite(tx, type, rid, db):
20
db.reservationTable[type].mergeMammothWrite(rid, tx.epoch, tx.state)
21 Function TryToRunOnDatabase(tx, db):
22
if tx.isMammoth == true or HasConflicts(tx, db) == false then
23
Install tx.RWSet writes to db
24
return true
25
return false
26 Function HasConflicts(tx, db):
27
seenVisited ↗ false
28
seenUnvisited ↗ false
29
for entry ↗ tx.RWSet do
30
reservation ↗ db.reservationTable[entry.type].get(entry.rid)
31
if entry has WAW or budget and reservation.wid < tx.tid then
32
return true
// Allow reading from visited and not updated regions
33
seenVisited |= reservation.state == VISITED and
reservation.hasMammothWrite
34
isPending ↗ reservation.state == PENDING_WRITE or
(reservation.state == PENDING_READ and entry.isRead == false)
// Track if we have seen unvisited regions
35
seenUnvisited ↗ seenUnvisited or reservation.state ==
UNVISITED
36
if (seenVisited and seenUnvisited) or isPending then return true
37
return false

eliminates the need for multi-version storage, minimizing changes
to the Neo4j codebase. After reading, transactions execute locally,
tracking their read-write sets and reserving entries for reads and
writes in a global reservation table (line 12). These reservations are
crucial for deterministic con$ict resolution in the commit phase.
To make a reservation, each transaction speci!es the operation
type (i.e., read or write), the record type, the unique record identi!er, and the current epoch. For LPGs, record types include nodes,
node labels, individual relationships, relationship types, and index entries; additionally, all relationships connected to a node are
grouped as a unique record type (i.e., neighborhood). Short-lived
transactions and mammoths make reservations slightly di"erently.
Using ReserveRead and ReserveWrite (lines 13 and 15), short-lived
transactions attempt to install reads and writes (tracked separately)
in the global reservation table. The transaction with the smallest
TID always secures a reservation regardless of the execution order.
If a transaction fails to obtain a write reservation, it can skip the

Local Execution Phase

During the local execution phase, the mammoth and short-lived
transactions read from the same database snapshot at the epoch’s
start, as shown in line 11 of Alg. 1. This single-snapshot approach
1 Mammoths have relaxed performance needs, and running multiple at once increases

contention and complicates dependency tracking.
2 To reduce user e"ort, we explore static analysis and runtime heuristics to automatically identify mammoths based on expected access patterns and execution time.

4780

3

Mammoth Frontier
R
UNVISITED

PENDING_READ

PENDING_WRITE

TX3

Pending
Read

VISITED

Unvisited

Visited

Figure 4: Mammoth protocol state machine
commit phase, as it has already encountered a WAW con$ict, but
must still install its reservations to maintain deterministic results.
The single mammoth transaction also makes reservations (lines 17
and 19) but does not rely on its TID. Instead, it tracks the state of
each record it accesses, indicating whether it still has work to do
or has completed that record’s read-write operations. The mammoth always installs its reservations independently of short-lived
transactions. While we omit the pseudocode for brevity, during the
execution phase, mammoths are broken down into smaller tasks
based on a prede!ned epoch budget to prevent monopolizing the
system. The budget refers to the number of accesses to various
records (e.g., reading a label or updating a property) and allows
mammoths to span multiple epochs without a"ecting other transactions’ performance. We explain how it is calculated in Sec. 4.
Once all transactions complete the !rst phase, the commit phase
begins. As shown in lines 4-5 of Alg. 1, workers schedule the transactions for commit after local execution.
For example, consider three transactions with the following readwrite sets in epoch 1: (i) 𝑎 𝑏 1 writes 𝑊 1 ; (ii) 𝑎 𝑏 2 writes 𝑊 1 and reads
𝑊 2 ; (iii) mammoth tx reads nodes 𝑊 1 through 𝑊 3 . After the !rst
phase, the reservation table for the node records would have three
entries: {𝑊 1 : 𝑐𝑑𝑒𝑄𝑓 = 1, 𝑔𝑕𝑖 = 1, 𝑂𝑅𝑗𝑅𝑐 = VISITED}, {𝑊 2 : 𝑐𝑑𝑒𝑄𝑓 =
1, 𝑃𝑕𝑖 = 2, 𝑂𝑅𝑗𝑅𝑐 = VISITED}, {𝑊 3 : 𝑐𝑑𝑒𝑄𝑓 = 1, 𝑂𝑅𝑗𝑅𝑐 = VISITED}.
The variables 𝑔𝑕𝑖 and 𝑃𝑕𝑖 show the earliest write and read TIDs
excluding mammoth, while 𝑂𝑅𝑗𝑅𝑐 refers to the mammoth states
discussed in the following section. In this case, 𝑎 𝑏 2 did not install
its write and can skip the commit phase.

3.2

Commit Phase

During the commit phase, each transaction independently makes a
deterministic decision based on the reservations from the previous
phase for a given epoch. If a short-lived transaction has no con$icts
with other short-lived transactions or the mammoth, its changes
are applied. If con$icts arise, the transaction is rescheduled to the
beginning of the next epoch (lines 7-9) unless it violates an integrity
constraint, in which case it is not retried. The order of aborted
transactions is preserved, ensuring they will eventually commit
because they have lower TIDs than transactions initiated after them.
For con$icts between short-lived transactions, if a transaction
has WAW or RAW dependencies on an earlier transaction (one with
a smaller TID), it must abort. No rollback is needed, however, as
updates are stored locally in tx.RWSet and have not yet been applied.
For con$icts with a mammoth, the short-lived transaction checks
the mammoth’s state for that record (e.g., whether the record has
already been visited by the mammoth), as shown in lines 33-36.

4781

W
W

R

Pending
Write

TX1

1

2

TX4

4

W
TX2

Figure 5: Mammoth con!icts with short-lived transactions
Since the mammoth is broken down into smaller tasks to distribute its work across epochs based on a set budget, it does not
process the entire graph in one pass. While the mammoth is running, records transition through distinct states shown in Fig. 4.
Initially, each record is marked as UNVISITED and can transition to
one of three states: (i) PENDING_READ, indicating the mammoth has
read but not !nished with the record; (ii) PENDING_WRITE, meaning
the mammoth is still updating the record; or (iii) VISITED, indicating
all operations on the record are complete.
We want short-lived transactions to execute strictly before or
after the mammoth’s actions, preserving a clear order in the serialization graph. To ensure this property, we use the mammoth’s four
states to identify potential con$icts. Speci!cally, a short-lived transaction can either access fully VISITED records (line 33) or UNVISITED
ones (line 35), but not both – except for VISITED records without
writes. It also cannot interact with records in PENDING_WRITE state,
though it can read records marked as PENDING_READ within an epoch.
Fig. 5 shows an example involving four transactions while a
mammoth updates the graph, moving from the left side of the graph
to the right (see the dashed line indicating its frontier). 𝑎 𝑏 1 ( 1 ) can
write to the VISITED section of the graph, and 𝑎 𝑏 4 ( 4 ) can write
to the UNVISITED part. 𝑎 𝑏 3 ( 3 ) can read from a PENDING_READ node
but cannot modify it (e.g., properties or relationships), as updating
requires reserving the node for a write, which would result in a
con$ict. 𝑎 𝑏 2 ( 2 ) con$icts with the mammoth because it attempts
to operate on parts of the graph that the mammoth is currently
processing (i.e., PENDING) and has already VISITED. The same would
apply to both VISITED and UNVISITED sections.
Recall that only one mammoth is allowed at a time to ensure it
always makes progress. The mammoth is guaranteed to commit
its updates to the database (line 22) deterministically, meaning
no validation step (e.g., constraint violations) or other transaction
will abort it. At the end of the commit phase (line 7), the worker
responsible for the mammoth checks for any remaining work and,
if so, schedules it for the next epoch. The mammoth uses local data
structures to track its execution progress, allowing it to pause and
resume similar to suspendable tasks [37].

3.3

Determinism and Serializability

Hot items

Compared to the Aria protocol [46], the mammoth can be logically
viewed as the transaction with the smallest TID in all epochs. It
performs a prede!ned number of operations using a budget, pauses,
and gets scheduled for the next epoch. Since the mammoth cannot
be aborted, its execution is deterministic, ensuring that our protocol
maintains con$ict serializability. Reordering transactions around
mammoth actions is safe due to the assumptions (iii) and (iv).
Regardless of the transaction execution order, the reservation
table will always store the smallest TID that read or wrote a record
during that epoch, along with information about its mammoth
state. A transaction can only install its TID if it is smaller, while
the mammoth independently installs its state without considering
other transactions. This ensures the !rst phase is deterministic.
The same principle applies to the commit phase, as the reservation table remains unchanged and serves as the single source of
truth for detecting con$icts. Each transaction independently uses its
read-write set to make decisions in parallel with other transactions.
To ensure clients have a consistent view of the graph within
a session, we also introduce bookmarks [54]. Bookmarks prevent
clients from accessing UNVISITED or PENDING sections after reading
results from VISITED mammoth sections. In other words, transactions within a session cannot time-travel and must wait for the
mammoth to complete before proceeding.

3.4

Graph

Patterns
Hot pattern

P1

knows

M1

M2

T1

T2

P2

P

is_author_of

M

M3

has_tag

Partitions

P3

reply_of

M4

Hot items

T3

M2

P1
P3

M1
M4

Partition 1

M3

P2
T2

T1
T3

Partition 2

Figure 6: Partitioning based on accesses and patterns: P =
Person, M = Message, T = Tag.
In the following section, we will discuss how the graph structure
and workloads can further increase concurrency.
Finally, the above mechanisms are not exclusive to graph DBMSs;
we observe that they could also be applied to relational systems.
In simple terms, graph traversals map to table joins, nodes and
relationships become tables, and the protocol proceeds similarly.

4

ACCELERATING CONFLICT RESOLUTION

Many real-world graphs have an irregular structure, often following
a power-law distribution [31, 67]. This results in some neighborhoods being more densely connected than others (e.g., social or
road networks). Updating high-degree nodes, or supernodes, can
lead to unpredictable access bursts, making it hard to evenly distribute the processing load. A small number of these supernodes can
become hotspots, causing workload skew and a higher frequency
of con$icts. Handling con$icts in read-write graph traversals (i.e.,
chained data accesses) is more challenging than resolving con$icts
in simple point lookups. In some pathological cases, a short-lived
transaction may be blocked inde!nitely if its path overlaps with
both VISITED and UNVISITED regions. Dense graphs exacerbate this
problem, as the higher chance of overlap with mammoths increases
the likelihood of contention, signi!cantly degrading performance.
To address this, we need to use the structural properties of graphs
to improve con$ict resolution. In this section, we introduce techniques aimed at this goal: (i) applying workload- and query-aware
partitioning to prioritize the mammoth’s access to regions that
are less likely to block short-lived transactions due to VISITEDUNVISITED con$icts; (ii) parallelizing mammoths to shorten their
duration and tuning the deterministic protocol to reduce the epoch
span, lowering the latency of short-lived transactions; (iii) annotating parts of the graph accessed by the mammoth before execution
to eliminate unnecessary con$icts; and (iv) reordering short-lived
transactions to minimize aborts caused by RAW dependencies.

Applicability and Limitations

The logic of a mammoth transitioning through the states of Fig. 4
is straightforward. Similar to graph traversal, the process starts
from a set of nodes, and as their neighbors are accessed for reads
or writes, they are marked as PENDING. Once all operations on a
node are complete, it transitions to VISITED and will not be accessed
again by the mammoth. This method e#ciently handles supernodes,
allowing the mammoth to pause and resume processing across
multiple epochs rather than completing them in a single epoch.
The mammoth cannot update an already VISITED region, complicating certain graph algorithms. For example, iterative algorithms
like PageRank [48] maintain many nodes in the PENDING state until
completion, as nodes need to be revisited across multiple iterations.
Nonetheless, our approach can still support such cases. We can
extend T!"#F$%& with !ner-grained record management at the
property level (e.g., updating only one property in PageRank) or use
commutative operations (e.g., incrementing a counter) to enhance
concurrency. Relaxing isolation could boost performance but risks
correctness, a trade-o" we intentionally avoid. Our protocol aligns
well with our customers’ mammoth workloads, with expensive
iterative graph algorithms handled by the Neo4j GDS library [56].
While epochs simplify con$ict resolution, they also increase
latency (equal to the epoch duration) compared to traditional nondeterministic protocols like 2PL or MVCC. Additionally, the mammoth’s budget must be chosen carefully to avoid workload imbalances within an epoch. In some cases, adding timeouts for shortlived transactions could enhance client experience when latency
exceeds acceptable limits.
The phantom problem [32] can be handled with standard techniques as in [39, 46]. Overall, our protocol allows regular transactions to run concurrently with the mammoth, reducing tail latency.

4.1

Query- and Workload-aware Partitioning

In our work, creating disjoint graph partitions serves a dual purpose:
(i) they function as work units for parallelizing mammoths across
workers (in parallel or distributed execution), and (ii) they prioritize
"hot" graph regions, allowing mammoths to visit them !rst and
reduce early contention with short-lived transactions. However,
existing partitioning algorithms like Fennel [78] and LGD [66] are
workload-agnostic and aim only to reduce communication overhead between partitions (i.e., relationships spanning two partitions).

4782

to imbalanced execution. We handle this at the transaction protocol
level by pausing and resuming work, as discussed in Sec. 3.4.
R()#*)+PM is an o%ine algorithm that requires graph repartitioning when the graph structure changes signi!cantly, which is
generally rare in typical transactional workloads that support a speci!c user-level application. In Sec. 6.3, we show that repartitioning
can be completed within tens of seconds, enabling frequent execution. However, we can avoid the overhead of full repartitioning by
applying a streaming repartitioning strategy [33, 41]. New nodes
are placed into "cold" partitions by default, while deletions remove
nodes from their partitions, allowing mammoths to bypass them.

Algorithm 2: R()#*)+PM partitioner
Function partition(db, patterns, numberOfPartitions):
// Sort node ids by accesses
2
nodeIds ↗ sort(db.getNodeIds(), db.getNodeAccesses())
3
partitionSize ↗ nodeIds.size() / numberOfPartitions
4
partitions ↗ { ↘ } , curPartition ↗ ↘ , visited ↗ ↘ , idx ↗ 0
5
while visited.size() ω nodeIds.size() do
6
if curPartition.size() ≃ partitionSize then
7
partitions.add(curPartition)
8
curPartition ↗ ↘
9
nodeId ↗ nodeIds[idx++]
10
if visited.contains(nodeId) == false then
11
visited.add(nodeId)
12
curPartition.add(nodeId)
13
for pattern ↗ patterns do
14
update curPartition and visited based on pattern
15
if curPartition.isEmpty() == false then partitions.add(curPartition)
16
return partitions
1

4.2

Parallel Mammoths and Parameter Tuning

The end-to-end latency of short-lived transactions is closely tied to
both the duration of the mammoth and the length of each epoch.
While the mammoth is running, short-lived transactions are more
likely to be aborted because of contention with the mammoth. Moreover, a longer epoch span means that short-lived transactions take
longer to commit, even without con$icts. To address this challenge,
we must speed up mammoths by executing them in parallel and
responsively tuning the epoch duration.
Parallel execution. Since a single mammoth is structured into
smaller tasks over disjoint graph partitions, a natural solution is to
execute these tasks in parallel. The epoch-based structure of the
deterministic protocol aligns well with parallel graph algorithms,
such as Breadth-First Search (BFS) [68] or Single-Source Shortest
Path (SSSP). For example, LDBC 𝑍1 from Fig. 3 can compute relationship weights in parallel, while 𝑍2 can perform a parallel BFS to
!nd experts connected to a person and update their properties. In
both cases, parallel tasks may perform redundant operations since
they synchronize at the epoch’s end, with only one task ultimately
installing its writes for a given record. The tasks use compareand-swap (CAS) operations to reserve writes within an epoch for
di"erent records and consolidate to skip already visited nodes.
Our evaluation shows that parallelizing mammoth tasks not only
reduces the tail latency of short-lived transactions but also allows
the system to return to regular execution faster. This prevents the
database from becoming overloaded with blocked transactions.
The parameters in$uencing epoch duration are: (i) the epoch size,
the batch size of transactions per epoch; (ii) the mammoth budget, or
the operations it performs within an epoch; and (iii) the number of
parallel mammoth tasks. A small epoch size may cause short-lived
transactions to queue waiting for the mammoth, while an overly
large size can prolong the duration unnecessarily. Our experiments
in Sec. 6.5 suggest that an optimal epoch size is about !ve times
the average transaction throughput (𝑅𝑙/ s), balancing e#ciency
with recovery from aborts. The mammoth budget and parallel task
count depend on workload and hardware con!guration. A general
guideline is to set the budget as a multiple (e.g., 10→) of the average
transaction throughput and assign all workers for parallelism.

These algorithms assume a uniform traversal likelihood for each
relationship, which is realistic for o%ine graph algorithms like
PageRank [48] but not for transactional workloads [33].
To identify graph hotspots, we track frequent access and traversal
patterns. Although Neo4j does not track this metadata by default, it
can be e#ciently collected through sampling (see Sec. 5.1). Ranking
"hot" records allows the mammoth to prioritize con$ict resolution
for frequent accesses. Additionally, using recurring graph patterns
improves the workload-sensitive partition stability [33] by forming
communities that reduce VISITED-UNVISITED con$icts. The patterns
capture labels, properties, and relationship directions in LPGs.
Fig. 6 illustrates a subgraph of LDBC where Person labeled nodes
𝑌1 to 𝑌3 are linked to Messages 𝑘 they authored. These Messages
may have Tags 𝑎 or be Comments on other Messages. Consider the
scenario that the most frequent pattern submitted to the database involves reading or updating the messages of a single person
((p:P)<-[is_author_of]-(m:M)), and 𝑌1 and 𝑌3 are accessed more
often than 𝑌2 . To create (for simplicity) two partitions that prioritize frequent accesses, we would include the "hot" nodes 𝑌 1 , 𝑌3 ,
𝑘1 , and 𝑘4 in the !rst partition, as well as 𝑘2 , since it is likely to
be accessed when visiting 𝑌 1 . The second partition would contain
the remaining nodes, which are less frequently accessed due to
workload skew and query patterns (e.g., no queries access the Tags).
Building on the above idea, we introduce a novel partitioning
heuristic called R()#*)+PM3 , which accounts for both record access frequency and recurring graph patterns. Alg. 2 outlines the
algorithm’s logic: (i) it !rst sorts all node IDs by access frequency,
from most to least frequent (line2); (ii) then, it iterates over these
nodes, checking if they have not been visited4 (line 10) and adds
them to the current partition (line 12); (iii) for each node, even if
already visited, the algorithm uses the most frequent graph patterns starting from that node to add more nodes to the partition,
marking them as visited. This ensures that each partition is disjoint
by excluding previously visited nodes.
In lines 6-8, if the current partition exceeds a prede!ned size of
|𝑁 |
#𝑂𝑃𝑄𝑅𝑀𝑅𝑀𝑆𝑇𝑈 , it is considered complete and added to the list of partitions. This can result in varying-sized partitions, potentially leading

4.3

Graph Tagging and Transaction Reordering

When running the transactional protocol for mammoths, an initial
assumption would be that they will access any graph record (e.g.,
nodes, relationships, neighborhoods), meaning every entity should

3 Named from the steps involved: Ranking and Pattern Matching.

4 It also checks if the nodes satisfy a !lter predicate based on labels and property values

(e.g., include only Person labeled nodes), which we omit for simplicity.

4783

Connection Manager
Stored Procedures
Concurrency Protocols
(unified API)
2PL

Aria + Mammoths

Query Manager
TX Queue

Phase 1 Queue

Mammoth Queue

Phase 2 Queue

5.1

TuskFlow
Partition Store
Partitions
New entities
Partitioning Algos

Monitoring
Manager
Statistics:
latency, throughput,
graph accesses

Graph Storage Layer (in-memory)
Nodes

Relationships

In-/Out-neighborhoods

Figure 7: T!"#F$%& architecture
Epoch ID (64bit)

Read TID (32 bit)

Write TID (32 bit)

Mammoth State
(2 bit)

Mammoth Write
(1 bit)

Figure 8: Reservation entry
be marked as UNVISITED. However, this does not hold true for many
workloads and can often lead to unnecessary con$icts.
For example, in LDBC query 𝑍1, it is known that only nodes
labeled as Messages are accessed, or in another case, 𝑍1 updates
only the knows relationship. Thus, we can optimize execution by
extracting the labels, relationship types, and record accesses speci!ed in mammoth queries. By focusing solely on these entities,
we can more accurately detect mammoth con$icts. This approach
signi!cantly prunes the graph regions considered irrelevant to the
mammoth, minimizing con$icts.
Transaction reordering [10, 11, 59] can enhance performance
by reducing aborts for short-lived transactions. To keep our protocol deterministic and serializable without coordination, we apply
the reordering algorithm from [46], which converts RAW to WAR
(Write-After-Read) dependencies. The only modi!cation required is
to add a check to the protocol in Alg. 1. Speci!cally, after line 31, we
ensure that a transaction does not have WAR or RAW dependencies
with earlier transactions (in addition to WAW) by using the read
and write TIDs already recorded in each reservation entry.

5

Overview

Fig. 7 illustrates the components of T!"#F$%&, implemented as a
standalone 14 K-line Java codebase, separate from Neo4j. To reduce
the memory footprint of transactional queries, it uses statically allocated object pools for tasks, primitive collections [25], and roaring
bitmaps [14] as in [68].
Before clients can submit queries, they connect to the Connection Manager, which determines when a transaction is ready for
submission or when results can be returned based on bookmarks.
As explained in Sec. 3.3, users cannot time-travel between VISITED
and UNVISITED regions, which ensures session consistency.
For Concurrency Protocols, T!"#F$%& supports both (strict) 2PL
and deterministic execution. To implement 2PL, it uses Forseti,
Neo4j’s open-source lock manager [55]. For the reservation table
needed from Alg. 1, T!"#F$%& maintains a concurrent hashmap
for each record type, with workers installing updates using CAS
operations based on TIDs. TIDs are assigned through a monotonically increasing counter at transaction submission. Fig. 8 shows a
reservation entry that uses: (i) 64 bits for the epoch; (ii) 64 bits for
the earliest read-write TIDs; and (iii) 3 bits for the mammoth state.
Currently, T!"#F$%& supports pre-compiled stored procedures
to simplify integration with Neo4j [57], similar to other deterministic databases [72, 79]. Written in Java, these procedures express
arbitrary read-write logic over the graph and allow T!"#F$%& to
extract "hot patterns" for R()#*)+PM. For short-lived transactions,
both 2PL and the deterministic protocol use a uni!ed API with simple read and write calls, abstracting away locking or reservation
details based on the execution mode. However, for mammoths, users
must explicitly manage the execution and state transitions using
the ReserveMammothRead and ReserveMammothWrite calls. We plan to
develop a compiler [70] that parses Cypher [35] and automatically
generates mammoth logic.
The Query Manager schedules transactions and manages transitions between the two execution modes (see Sec. 5.2). The Graph
Storage Layer contains: (i) a node vector; (ii) a relationship vector;
(iii) two vectors of incoming and outgoing relationship IDs; and (iv)
auxiliary data structures on labels and relationship types.
The Monitoring Manager tracks system metrics like end-to-end
latency, average throughput (a"ecting epoch size), and the count
of committed and aborted transactions. During execution, workers
pro!le a subset of read-write accesses and report to the Monitoring
Manager. Pro!ling occurs per transaction (all operations recorded
or none), improving the collocation of neighboring graph entities
for the R()#*)+PM partitioner.
The Partition Store manages graph partitions for mammoth transactions and supports hash, Fennel, and R()#*)+PM partitioners.
Parallel mammoth tasks retrieve disjoint partitions from the store,
and any new nodes post-partitioning go to "cold" partitions. T!"#’
F$%& triggers repartitioning periodically, based on a con!gurable
interval and metrics from the Monitoring Manager.

TUSKFLOW ARCHITECTURE

While integrating our protocol into a deterministic database is
straightforward, commercial graph databases [2, 50, 52, 74] are not
designed to easily support deterministic transactions. To establish
an easy future path to production and minimize the changes for
Neo4j, we chose to adapt our protocol to existing databases by
integrating it into the transaction scheduling subsystem.
In this section, we introduce T!"#F$%&, an experimental graph
database based on Neo4j that uses two execution modes: (i) 2PL
for short-lived transactions; and (ii) our deterministic protocol
from Sec. 3 for mixed mammoth and short-lived transactions. We begin with an overview of the system (Sec. 5.1) and then explain how
T!"#F$%& transitions between its two execution modes (Sec. 5.2).

5.2

Transaction Scheduling

Alg. 3 outlines the scheduling logic of the Query Manager. During
the regular execution mode, when no mammoth transactions are
submitted, workers retrieve and execute short-lived transactions
from the txQueue using 2PL. However, when one or more mammoth

4784

6.1

Algorithm 3: Query manager transaction scheduling

transactions arrive, the Query Manager switches to deterministic execution mode (line 4) and processes them one at a time. In this mode,
workers handle transactions from two queues: p1Queue and p2Queue,
corresponding to the two protocol phases.
Based on the epoch size, a !xed number of transactions from
the txQueue are moved to the p1Queue (lines 12-14), along with the
mammoth transaction (line 9), and a barrier is set. Once all tasks in
the !rst phase are completed, they are moved to the p2Queue, and
the second phase begins with a new barrier (see Sec. 3.2). Aborted
transactions are moved back to p1Queue before new transactions
from txQueue can be added based on available slots within the
epoch size (line 11). After all mammoth transactions are processed,
the Query Manager resets any aborted transactions to 2PL, places
them back in txQueue, and resumes regular execution mode.

Table 2: p99 latency

Table 1: Evaluation datasets

6

Dataset

Domain

|V|

|E|

|E|/|V|

WikiTalk [43]
DBPedia [8]
USRoad [63]
LDBC SF10 [31, 67]

communication net.
hyperlink
rail network
social network

1M
18 M
24 M
34 M

7.8 M
172 M
58 M
165 M

7.8
9.5
4.8
9.8

Experimental Setup

All experiments were performed on an m5.8xlarge AWS EC2 instance with 32 physical cores, 35.8 MiB LLC, and 128 GiB memory,
using Amazon Linux 2023 (kernel v. 6.1) and Corretto OpenJDK17.
Datasets and workloads. For our evaluation, we use two realworld graph datasets and a synthetic one to provide a diverse set of
scenarios: (i) DBPedia[8], a hyperlink network of Wikipedia where
pages are nodes and hyperlinks are relationships; (ii) USRoad [63],
a low-degree road network graph with a grid-like structure; and
(iii) LDBC [31, 67], which simulates real-world interactions over
a social network. Since USRoad is undirected, we create two relationships for each original one, and for LDBC, we store only the
properties required for our queries. Table 1 summarizes the graphs.
The LDBC SNB benchmark represents an OLTP workload, yet it
only covers short-lived transactions. To simulate mammoths on the
LDBC network, we also use the three queries described in Sec. 2.5.
These queries represent typical production workloads for both
balanced and unbalanced mammoths. Speci!cally, 𝑍1 and 𝑍2 are
(o%ine) analytical LDBC-BI queries [67], which we run as (online)
mammoth transactions alongside regular ones. Since DBPedia and
USRoad do not have labeled nodes, we only use a variation of 𝑍0.
Database systems. We compare our deterministic protocol to 2PL
using T!"#F$%& instead of Neo4j5 for fairness [69]. For MVCC,
we use Postgres v.15.0, con!gured according to best practices. Aria
performs similarly to 2PL but with higher latency due to blocking all
transactions until the mammoth completes. Unless stated otherwise,
we set the epoch budget to 2M ops, use 32 parallel tasks, and set
the epoch size to 5→ the average transaction throughput.
Metrics. The main performance metrics in the benchmarks are
throughput and end-to-end tail latency, measured at the 99th percentile (p99). Candlesticks in the plots represent the 5th , 25th , 50th ,
75th , and 99th latency percentiles.

// txQueue stores short-lived txs
// mQueue stores mammoth txs
// p1Queue/p2Queue stores txs for protocol’s 1st/2nd phase
1 Function run(txQueue, mQueue, p1Queue, p2Queue):
2
while true do
3
if mQueue.isEmpty() == false then
// Schedule tasks until there is no mammoth
4
ScheduleInEpochs(txQueue, mQueue, p1Queue, p2Queue)
// Aborted queries use regular execution from here
5
ResetExecutionMode(txQueue, p1Queue)
6 Function ScheduleInEpochs(txQueue, mQueue, p1Queue, p2Queue):
7
while mQueue.isEmpty() == false do
8
mammoth ↗ mQueue.poll()
9
p1Queue.add(mammoth)
10
while mammoth.hasFinished == false do
11
size ↗ min(epochSize - p1Queue.size(), txQueue.size())
12
for i ↗ 0 to size do
13
tx ↗ txQueue.poll()
14
move tx to p1Queue and set its protocol to deterministic
15
p1Counter ↗ p1Queue.size()
// start phase 1 and wait until p1Counter == 0
16
p2Counter ↗ p2Queue.size()
// start phase 2 and wait until p2Counter == 0
17 Function ResetExecutionMode(txQueue, p1Queue):
18
for tx ↗ p1Queue do move tx to txQueue and set its protocol to 2PL

6.2

Workload

p99 latency (Mammoth duration) in s
T!"#F$%&
2PL
Postgres

DBpedia
USRoad

0.9 (4.1)
0.8 (4.8)

10.5 (11.7)
13.7 (14.9)

40.9 (71.6)
19.2 (91.7)

Comparison with 2PL and Postgres

To study the e#ciency of T!"#F$%&, we use the LDBC social
network with queries 𝑍0-𝑍2 and measure the throughput of shortlived transactions. In this experiment, we !x the input rate of
short-lived transactions at 10K per second, which is a ballpark
representative of a modest real system. All clients submit either
read-only or read-write 1-hop queries, with 80% being read-only.
These queries start from a random Person (uniform distribution)
and either read or update ten random Messages based on the pattern (p:P)<-[is_author_of]-(m:M). We compare our deterministic
protocol to 2PL by starting a single mammoth at the 60 s mark.
For the simplest query, 𝑍0, which updates all nodes labeled
as Messages, Fig. 9 shows that T!"#F$%& completes the mammoth
execution in under 8 s, thanks to the optimizations discussed in

EVALUATION

In this section, we evaluate the performance of T!"#F$%& with
mammoths. We show that it does not block short-lived transactions
and delivers lower tail latency compared to 2PL and MVCC (Sec. 6.2).
Next, we analyze the impact of graph partitioning (Sec. 6.3) and
present an optimization breakdown of the con$ict resolution techniques (Sec. 6.4) from Sec. 4. Lastly, we o"er guidelines for tuning
the deterministic protocol (Sec. 6.5) and demonstrate how T!"#’
F$%& performs as the transaction throughput increases (Sec. 6.6).

5 2PL provides con$ict serializability, whereas Neo4j o"ers Read Committed isolation.

4785

 

Figure 9: LDBC Q0





Figure 10: LDBC Q1

Figure 11: LDBC Q2

Figure 13: Optimizations breakdown

Figure 14: Latency with increasing tx/s



Figure 12: Latency comparison

Sec. 4, in particular the parallel execution. In contrast, 2PL blocks
all transactions for 21 s, whereas T!"#F$%& allows both read-only
and read-write transactions to make progress and commit.
For 𝑍1, the most compute-intensive query, Fig. 10 shows that
T!"#F$%& completes the mammoth in 60 s while maintaining a
throughput close to the input rate. However, there are two points
where throughput temporarily drops to zero. This happens because
many transactions are aborted due to the mammoth, causing the
protocol to spend considerable time scheduling them. During these
periods, the epoch duration exceeds 1 s, leading to a temporary stall
in throughput. In contrast, 2PL fails to complete due to transaction
overload, eventually causing an out-of-memory exception, further
demonstrating the importance of parallelizing mammoths.
𝑍2 in Fig. 11 exhibits a similar pattern to 𝑍0. T!"#F$%& completes the mammoth in under 15 s, compared to 68 s with 2PL.
Although some epochs temporarily block short-lived transactions,
the average throughput remains close to 10K tx/s.
Next, we evaluate the impact of mammoths on the end-to-end
latency of short-lived transactions, using the LDBC social network
with 𝑍0-𝑍2, and the DBpedia and USRoad graphs. For DBpedia and
USRoad, the mammoth behaves as LDBC 𝑍0 and updates all nodes,
while the 1-hop queries start from any random node and either
read or update ten random outgoing neighbors. Fig. 12 shows that
2PL results in up to 6→ higher median and p75 latency. Additionally,
p95 (not shown here) and tail latency can be up to 180→ and 17.2→
higher. This translates into waiting minutes instead of hundreds of
milliseconds, which is critical for responsive systems.

To simplify workloads for Postgres, we use the unlabeled DBpedia and USRoad graphs, create hash indexes for in- and outrelationships, and reduce the input rate to 2.5K tx/s, as Postgres
cannot otherwise handle the 1-hop traversals. As shown in Table 2,
Postgres experiences 24-45→ higher tail latency than T!"#F$%& and
performs worse than 2PL, which completes the mammoth faster.
In summary, choosing the right protocol signi!cantly impacts
both the throughput and latency of short-lived transactions and
T!"#F$%& greatly improves concurrency. Finally, our pro!ling
of 2PL revealed that the lock manager is a major bottleneck for
mammoth transactions.
Table 3: Partitioning with point and 1-hop queries
Workload

Read ratio

p99 latency in s
Point queries
1-hop queries
Serial Ranking Serial Ranking R1hop

DBpedia

80%
90%
100%

1.53
1.75
1.72

1.86
2.01
1.92

0.86
0.54
0.23

0.87
0.62
0.48

0.50
0.34
0.28

LDBC

80%
90%
100%

3.27
3.62
4.14

3.91
3.61
3.62

2.30
1.58
2.41

2.41
1.99
1.47

1.04
0.67
0.93

USRoad

80%
90%
100%

3.74
3.68
3.45

3.80
3.86
3.23

1.16
1.31
1.19

1.02
0.93
1.02

0.71
0.79
0.73

6.3

Graph Partitioning with Skewed Workloads

Given most graph workloads will exhibit skewed access patterns,
we now evaluate the bene!ts of the R()#*)+PM partitioner in

4786

Table 4: Partitioning with multi-hop queries
p99 latency in s
R1hop R2hop R3hop

RPatterns

0.73
0.78
3.65

0.40
0.32
0.57

0.47
0.36
1.29

-

-

2.05
1.71
2.81

3.65
3.45
2.79

0.57
0.82
0.76

1.29
1.08
1.67

-

-

80%
90%
100%

0.99
1.10
0.98

1.14
1.02
0.87

0.81
0.72
1.04

0.88
0.65
0.76

-

-

DBpedia 3-hops

80%
90%
100%

0.53
0.53
0.49

0.80
0.65
0.65

0.31
0.27
0.25

0.49
0.34
0.24

0.32
0.25
0.42

-

LDBC 3-hops

80%
90%
100%

1.75
1.53
2.87

3.41
3.75
3.79

0.92
0.75
1.15

0.98
1.01
1.93

5.50
5.20
7.63

-

USRoad 3-hops

80%
90%
100%

0.99
0.90
0.82

1.49
1.18
1.06

1.11
1.04
0.90

0.76
0.85
0.73

0.78
0.83
0.65

-

DBpedia mixed

80%
90%
100%

0.70
0.74
0.29

0.71
0.90
0.35

0.63
0.50
0.27

0.62
0.89
0.22

0.72
0.80
0.21

0.59
0.79
0.29

LDBC mixed

80%
90%
100%

3.24
2.39
3.13

2.98
3.33
3.26

1.41
0.83
1.35

2.48
1.79
2.00

5.66
4.95
5.17

0.89
1.05
1.36

USRoad mixed

80%
90%
100%

1.06
0.68
0.95

1.36
1.13
1.55

0.93
0.89
0.83

0.95
0.65
0.95

0.66
0.65
1.03

0.41
0.70
1.01

Workload

Read
ratio

Serial

Ranking

DBpedia 2-hops

80%
90%
100%

0.67
0.53
2.05

LDBC 2-hops

80%
90%
100%

USRoad 2-hops

these scenarios. Speci!cally, we aim to understand which types of
patterns can enhance performance for various query workloads. As
a baseline, we use serial partitioning, where nodes are assigned to
partitions based on their IDs. This approach can o"er good average
performance due to its memory-friendly node access, particularly
for synthetic graphs like LDBC SNB, where a person’s messages are
often collocated within the same partition. We omit comparisons
with hash and Fennel partitioning algorithms, as they are workloadagnostic and signi!cantly degrade performance in our evaluation.
For this experiment, we use LDBC SNB, DBpedia, and USRoad
graphs, with 𝑍0 as the mammoth. Short-lived transactions start at
a node selected using a Zip!an distribution (𝑚 = 1) applied to randomly shu%ed node IDs, and results are averaged across 5 runs. The
short-lived transactions have 5 di"erent con!gurations: (i) point
queries; (ii) 1-hop queries; (iii) 2-hop queries; (iv) 3-hop queries;
and (v) mixed transactions, which consist of 25% point queries, 55%
1-hop queries, 15% 2-hop queries, and 5% 3-hop queries – similar
to common production workloads. In LDBC SNB, multihop queries
use the pattern (p1:P)-[:know]{hops-1}->(p2:P) to access a Person
within their social circle and read/write 10 of its Messages. In DBpedia and USRoad, the queries traverse hops-1 outgoing relationships
and then access 10 direct relationships from the !nal node.
For each con!guration, we evaluate di"erent variations of R()#’
*)+PM: (i) Ranking without using patterns for partitioning; (ii) R1hop,
which leverages the most frequent 1-hop patterns; (iii) R2hop, using
2-hop patterns; (iv) R3hop, using 3-hop patterns; and (v) RPatterns,
which uses all available patterns. Lastly, we vary the percentage of
read-only queries between 80% and 100% while keeping the input

4787

rate at the maximum capacity that the lock manager can handle.
Tables 3 and 4 summarize the results regarding tail latency, with
the best approach for each workload highlighted in green.
Starting with point queries and only Ranking (no patterns) as
shown in Table 3, serial partitioning results in tail latencies that
are 2-21% lower. The exception is for 100% read-only workloads
with LDBC SNB and USRoad, where Ranking improves latency by
up to 13%. This indicates that relying solely on node accesses for
partitioning does not always enhance performance if the reduction
in con$icts does not outweigh the bene!ts of sequential memory
accesses. However, with 1-hop queries, utilizing the most frequent
1-hop pattern signi!cantly reduces tail latency by 1.6-2.6→.
For 2-hop queries (Table 4), R1hop generally delivers the best
performance, outperforming Serial by 1.5-3.5→ for most workloads.
The exception is USRoad, where R2hop surpasses R1hop due to
the graph’s low-degree structure, which favours partitioning that
collates long paths. Using the most common 2-hop patterns requires
at least 30% more time for partitioning. A similar trend is found
with 3-hop queries: R1hop achieves nearly 2→ lower tail latency
than Serial, except for USRoad, where R3hop performs best, albeit
with longer partitioning times. We also observe that using 2- or
3-hop patterns can have negative e"ects on performance (see LDBC3-hops), as it can split neighboring nodes that should have been
collocated (e.g., a Person not connected to her Messages).
For mixed workloads, RPartitions, which uses all available patterns regardless of length, generally achieves lower or similar tail
latency compared to R1hop. However, RPartitions requires at least
3→ more time for partitioning, which can be expensive for large
graphs and multiple patterns. Despite this, even R1hop still provides
up to 3.6→ lower tail latency compared to Serial partitioning.
Overall, using ranking with the most frequent 1-hop patterns
(R1hop) o"ers the best balance between partitioning cost and performance. The e"ectiveness of the "hot" patterns improves when they
include label information – note that only LDBC SNB has labels.
Finally, Serial partitioning is expected to perform worse on realworld graphs, where frequent updates can disrupt the collocation
of neighboring nodes with numerically close IDs.

6.4

Optimization Breakdown

We study T!"#F$%&’s con$ict optimization techniques from Sec. 4
using the LDBC SNB, DBpedia, and USRoad datasets with 𝑍0 and
1-hop read-write queries (80% read-only, at 10K tx/s). We measure
the tail latency of short-lived transactions across 5 con!gurations:
(i) no optimizations (baseline); (ii) parallel execution; (iii) graph
tagging on top of parallel execution; (iv) transaction reordering
with the previous optimizations; and (v) emulating an ideal protocol that resolves all con$icts (no-con$icts). Fig. 14 shows that
parallel execution reduces tail latency by 2.7-5.2→ by shortening the
mammoth duration. Graph tagging cuts tail latency by roughly 50%,
while transaction reordering improves performance for DBpedia
and USRoad by 62% and 49%, respectively. Transaction reordering has no e"ect on the LDBC SNB graph, as it has fewer write
con$icts between regular transactions, though it does help with
skewed workloads. Finally, the no-con$icts con!guration further
reduces latency by 3.5→, indicating the potential of more advanced
techniques, such as better transaction reordering algorithms [16].

Table 5: Parameter tuning

6.5

7

Budget
(#ops)

#Tasks

125K

1
8
16
32
64

18.8 (30.8)
8.3 (15.8)
8.9 (15.9)
7.9 (14.9)
8.6 (15.6)

30.5 (45.5)
20.7 (30.9)
22 (32.1)
21.8 (31.8)
21.2 (31.2)

62.5 (83.4)
53.3 (72.3)
53 (72)
48.7 (65.9)
50.9 (69)

500K

1
8
16
32
64

12.2 (22.3)
5 (10.9)
4.2 (9.5)
3.2 (8.7)
3.9 (9.1)

15.6 (26.4)
6.6 (12.8)
4.4 (10.7)
5.6 (11.2)
4.4 (10.3)

22.5 (35.4)
12.7 (20.8)
10.6 (18.0)
10.6 (17.8)
10.7 (17.7)

2M

1
8
16
32
64

12.4 (20.5)
4 (8.5)
3.1 (7)
2.1 (5.9)
2.4 (6.4)

13.8 (22)
4.1 (9.1)
2.9 (7.6)
3.2 (7.6)
3.3 (7.8)

16.1 (25.9)
5.7 (11.4)
4.5 (9.4)
4.5 (9.1)
4.5 (8.9)

4M

1
8
16
32
64

14.3 (20.3)
4.6 (8.7)
3.9 (7.8)
3 (6.5)
3.4 (7.2)

14.7 (21.3)
5.1 (9.2)
4.3 (8.1)
3.5 (7.4)
3.4 (7.3)

15.3 (22)
5.3 (9.5)
3.5 (7.7)
3.9 (8.1)
4.6 (8.4)

Transactional benchmarks for mammoths. Most existing relational database benchmarks overlook mammoth transactions, even
though they play a crucial role in many applications [18]. For example, HTAP benchmarks [6, 23, 24] combine OLTP queries [76] with
read-only queries from OLAP workloads [77]. Only OLxPBench [42]
introduces mammoth transactions that consist of read-write operations with analytical reads and demonstrates how they signi!cantly
impact the performance of HTAP systems.
Graph benchmarks have primarily focused on analytics [5, 13],
with only LDBC [31, 67] attempting to capture short update queries
alongside complex read-only ones. TAOBench [17] from Meta is
also limited to a small set of large write transactions. The queries
introduced in Sec. 2.5 aim to simulate typical production mammoth
workloads. In Sec. 6, we highlight that tail latency, in addition
to throughput, are both critical metrics to consider, and we also
emphasize the signi!cance of skewed access patterns for short-lived
transactions when running a mammoth.
Locking techniques. Fine-grained locking [39] is a common strategy to increase concurrency while preserving transactional semantics. While this approach cannot address issues with mammoth
transactions, our protocol could adopt similar !ne-grained record
management at the graph property level [4]. This would help prevent unnecessary con$icts caused by common graph algorithms,
like PageRank, which update only a few properties.
Another recent approach for mammoths is lock escalation [18],
which locks based on communities and motifs rather than individual graph entities or properties. While this can improve the ability of existing lock managers to handle mammoths, it still blocks
short-lived transactions from making progress. Our query- and
workload-aware partitioning approach was inspired by this idea,
but it constructs communities based on access patterns, enabling
concurrency without blocking other transactions.
Transaction scheduling is orthogonal to our epoch-based approach. LDSF [73], a hotspot-aware scheduling algorithm, might
help to prioritize transactions that block others within an epoch.
Other techniques schedule transactions by identifying "hot" keys
and postponing requests [12] or by learning abort patterns between
transactions [65]. As discussed in Sec. 6.4, we could achieve at least
a 3.5→ improvement in tail latency by exploring more advanced
reordering algorithms [16]. However, it is crucial to consider how
these methods might impact determinism and serializability.

p99 latency (Mammoth duration) in s
10K tx/s
20K tx/s
40K tx/s

Parameter Tuning

Since the duration of mammoth transactions and epoch length impact the performance of short-lived transactions, this experiment
explores how di"erent protocol parameters a"ect tail latency. Table 5 summarizes the results, varying the epoch budget from 125K
to 4M ops per epoch and the number of parallel tasks from 1 to 64.
We set the epoch size to 5→ the average transaction throughput,
using input rates of 10K, 20K, and 40K tx/s, with the best con!guration for each highlighted in green. All experiments use the LDBC
SNB graph with 1-hop traversals (80% read-only) and 𝑍0 as the
mammoth query. We observe that increasing the epoch budget from
125K to 2M reduces tail latency and overall transaction duration,
but further increase show diminishing returns. Similarly, increasing
the number of parallel mammoth tasks within an epoch improves
performance, but only up to 16 or 32 tasks. Based on these results,
we conclude that the number of tasks should not exceed the number
of available workers, and the mammoth budget should be around
10→ the average transaction throughput.

6.6

RELATED WORK

T!"#F$%&’s Scalability

Finally, we examine the scalability of T!"#F$%& using the LDBC
SNB graph with 𝑍0 and 1-hop read-write queries (80% read-only).
We measure the end-to-end latency of short-lived transactions
while varying the input rate from 10K to 500K tx/s. At 50K tx/s,
the median and p75 latency increase by nearly 18→, but tail latency
remains largely una"ected compared to 10K tx/s. Doubling the rate
to 100K tx/s raises all latency percentiles by around 5.9→, again
with only a small impact on tail latency. Even at this rate, latencies
remain at the granularity of a second, which is acceptable for many
applications. However, when the input rate reaches 500K tx/s, latency increases by up to two orders of magnitude, revealing the
limitations of our epoch-based approach due to the high scheduling
overhead. A distributed extension could help mitigate this issue
by partitioning the load across multiple nodes. However, this introduces new challenges – like ensuring partition consistency and
scheduling distributed queries – which we leave for future work.

8

CONCLUSION

In this work, we introduce the !rst deterministic concurrency protocol for mammoths, very large online transactions, that ensures con$ict serializability by strategically reordering regular transactions
around a mammoth. To further reduce con$icts with short-lived
transactions, we propose techniques that exploit graph properties,
including query- and workload-aware partitioning, graph entity
tagging, mammoth decomposition and parallel execution. These
techniques, implemented in T!"#F$%&, dramatically improve concurrency and reduce latency by up to 45→ compared to 2PL or
MVCC. Finally, while designed for graph databases, our protocol
also applies to relational systems, which face similar problems with
very large transactions.

4788

REFERENCES

for community detection. Dynamics On and Of Complex Networks, Volume 2:
Applications to Time-Varying Dynamical Systems (2013).
[29] J-C Delvenne, Sophia N Yaliraki, and Mauricio Barahona. 2010. Stability of graph
communities across time scales. PNAS (2010).
[30] Alin Deutsch, Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Keith Hare, Bei Li, Leonid Libkin,
Tobias Lindaaker, Victor Marsault, Wim Martens, Jan Michels, et al. 2022. Graph
pattern matching in GQL and SQL/PGQ. In SIGMOD.
[31] Orri Erling, Alex Averbuch, Josep Larriba-Pey, Hassan Cha!, Andrey Gubichev,
Arnau Prat, Minh-Duc Pham, and Peter Boncz. 2015. The LDBC social network
benchmark: Interactive workload. In SIGMOD.
[32] Kapali P. Eswaran, Jim N Gray, Raymond A. Lorie, and Irving L. Traiger. 1976.
The notions of consistency and predicate locks in a database system. Commun.
ACM. (1976).
[33] Hugo Firth and Paolo Missier. 2017. TAPER: query-aware, partition-enhancement
for large, heterogenous graphs. Distributed and Parallel Databases (2017).
[34] Hugo Firth, Paolo Missier, and Jack Aiston. 2018. Loom: Query-aware Partitioning
of Online Graphs. In EDBT.
[35] Nadime Francis, Alastair Green, Paolo Guagliardo, Leonid Libkin, Tobias Lindaaker, Victor Marsault, Stefan Plantikow, Mats Rydberg, Petra Selmer, and
Andrés Taylor. 2018. Cypher: An evolving query language for property graphs.
In SIGMOD.
[36] Hector Garcia-Molina and Kenneth Salem. 1987. Sagas. Sigmod Record (1987).
[37] Panagiotis Garefalakis, Konstantinos Karanasos, and Peter Pietzuch. 2019. Neptune: Scheduling suspendable tasks for uni!ed stream/batch applications. In
SOCC.
[38] Jim Gray et al. 1981. The transaction concept: Virtues and limitations. In VLDB.
[39] Jim N Gray, Raymond A Lorie, and Gianfranco R Putzolu. 1975. Granularity of
locks in a shared data base. Proc. VLDB Endow. (1975).
[40] Stavros Harizopoulos, Daniel J. Abadi, Samuel Madden, and Michael Stonebraker.
2008. OLTP through the looking glass, and what we found there. In SIGMOD.
[41] Jiewen Huang and Daniel J Abadi. 2016. Leopard: Lightweight edge-oriented
partitioning and replication for dynamic graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2016).
[42] Guoxin Kang, Lei Wang, Wanling Gao, Fei Tang, and Jianfeng Zhan. 2022. Olxpbench: Real-time, semantically consistent, and domain-speci!c are essential in
benchmarking, designing, and implementing htap systems. In ICDE.
[43] Jure Leskovec, Daniel Huttenlocher, and Jon Kleinberg. 2010. Governance in
social media: A case study of the Wikipedia promotion process. In ICWSM.
[44] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive
nlp tasks. NeurIPS (2020).
[45] Feifei Li. 2019. Cloud-native database systems at Alibaba: Opportunities and
challenges. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2019).
[46] Yi Lu, Xiangyao Yu, Lei Cao, and Samuel Madden. 2020. Aria: a fast and practical
deterministic OLTP database. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2020).
[47] Nancy Lynch and Michael Merritt. 1986. Introduction to the theory of nested
transactions. Theoretical Computer Science (1986).
[48] Grzegorz Malewicz, Matthew H Austern, Aart JC Bik, James C Dehnert, Ilan Horn,
Naty Leiser, and Grzegorz Czajkowski. 2010. Pregel: a system for large-scale
graph processing. In SIGMOD.
[49] Sergey Melnik, Andrey Gubarev, Jing Jing Long, Geo"rey Romer, Shiva Shivakumar, Matt Tolton, and Theo Vassilakis. 2010. Dremel: interactive analysis of
web-scale datasets. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2010).
[50] MemGraph. 2024. https://memgraph.com/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[51] Mark Needham and Amy E Hodler. 2019. Graph algorithms: practical examples
in Apache Spark and Neo4j. O’Reilly Media.
[52] Neo4j. 2010. Neo4j Graph Data Platform. https://neo4j.com/. Last access: July
21, 2025.
[53] Neo4j. 2021. Neo4j Breaks Scale Barrier with Trillion+ Relationship Graph. https:
//neo4j.com/press-releases/neo4j-scales-trillion-plus-relationship-graph/. Last
access: July 21, 2025.
[54] Neo4j. 2024. Coordinate parallel transactions. https://neo4j.com/docs/javamanual/current/bookmarks/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[55] Neo4j. 2024. Forseti Lock Manager. https://github.com/neo4j/neo4j/blob/
5.16/community/lock/src/main/java/org/neo4j/kernel/impl/locking/forseti/
ForsetiLockManager.java. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[56] Neo4j. 2024. Neo4j Graph Data Science. https://github.com/neo4j/graph-datascience. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[57] Neo4j. 2024. User-de!ned procedures. https://neo4j.com/docs/java-reference/
current/extending-neo4j/procedures/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[58] Anil Pacaci and M Tamer Özsu. 2019. Experimental analysis of streaming algorithms for graph partitioning. In sigmod.
[59] Christos H Papadimitriou. 1979. The serializability of concurrent database
updates. JACM (1979).
[60] PostgreSQL. 2023. PostgreSQL 15 Documentation SAVEPOINT. https://www.
postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-savepoint.html. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[61] Ian Rae, Eric Rollins, Je" Shute, Sukhdeep Sodhi, and Radek Vingralek. 2013.
Online, asynchronous schema change in F1. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2013).

[1] Daniel J Abadi and Jose M Faleiro. 2018. An overview of deterministic database
systems. Commun. ACM. (2018).
[2] Amazon Neptune. 2024. https://aws.amazon.com/neptune/. Last access: July 21,
2025.
[3] Konstantin Andreev and Harald Räcke. 2004. Balanced graph partitioning. In
SPAA.
[4] Renzo Angles, Marcelo Arenas, Pablo Barceló, Aidan Hogan, Juan Reutter, and Domagoj Vrgo&. 2017. Foundations of modern query languages for graph databases.
CSUR (2017).
[5] Timothy G Armstrong, Vamsi Ponnekanti, Dhruba Borthakur, and Mark
Callaghan. 2013. Linkbench: a database benchmark based on the facebook
social graph. In SIGMOD.
[6] Joy Arulraj, Andrew Pavlo, and Prashanth Menon. 2016. Bridging the archipelago
between row-stores and column-stores for hybrid workloads. In SIGMOD.
[7] Manoussos Athanassoulis, Kenneth Bøgh, and Stratos Idreos. 2019. Optimal
column layout for hybrid workloads. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2019).
[8] Sören Auer, Christian Bizer, Georgi Kobilarov, Jens Lehmann, Richard Cyganiak,
and Zachary Ives. 2007. Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. In Proc. Int.
Semant. Web Conf.
[9] Lars Backstrom, Dan Huttenlocher, Jon Kleinberg, and Xiangyang Lan. 2006.
Group formation in large social networks: membership, growth, and evolution.
In SIGKDD.
[10] Philip A Bernstein and Nathan Goodman. 1983. Multiversion concurrency
control—theory and algorithms. TODS (1983).
[11] Philip A Bernstein, Vassos Hadzilacos, Nathan Goodman, et al. 1987. Concurrency
control and recovery in database systems. Addison-wesley Reading.
[12] Yang Cao, Wenfei Fan, Weijie Ou, Rui Xie, and Wenyue Zhao. 2023. Transaction
Scheduling: From Con$icts to Runtime Con$icts. PACMMOD (2023).
[13] Mihai Capot’, Tim Hegeman, Alexandru Iosup, Arnau Prat-Pérez, Orri Erling,
and Peter Boncz. 2015. Graphalytics: A big data benchmark for graph-processing
platforms. In GRADES.
[14] Samy Chambi, Daniel Lemire, Owen Kaser, and Robert Godin. 2016. Better
bitmap performance with roaring bitmaps. Software: practice and experience
(2016).
[15] Jianjun Chen, Yonghua Ding, Ye Liu, Fangshi Li, Li Zhang, Mingyi Zhang, Kui
Wei, Lixun Cao, Dan Zou, Yang Liu, et al. 2022. ByteHTAP: bytedance’s HTAP
system with high data freshness and strong data consistency. Proc. VLDB Endow.
(2022).
[16] Audrey Cheng, Aaron Kabcenell, Jason Chan, Xiao Shi, Peter Bailis, Natacha
Crooks, and Ion Stoica. 2024. Towards Optimal Transaction Scheduling. Proc.
VLDB Endow. (2024).
[17] Audrey Cheng, Xiao Shi, Aaron Kabcenell, Shilpa Lawande, Hamza Qadeer, Jason
Chan, Harrison Tin, Ryan Zhao, Peter Bailis, Mahesh Balakrishnan, et al. 2022.
Taobench: An end-to-end benchmark for social network workloads. Proc. VLDB
Endow. (2022).
[18] Audrey Cheng, Jack Waudby, Hugo Firth, Natacha Crooks, and Ion Stoica. 2024.
Mammoths Are Slow: The Overlooked Transactions of Graph Data. Proc. VLDB
Endow. (2024).
[19] Avery Ching, Sergey Edunov, Maja Kabiljo, Dionysios Logothetis, and Sambavi
Muthukrishnan. 2015. One trillion edges: Graph processing at facebook-scale.
Proc. VLDB Endow. (2015).
[20] CNBC. 2018. Amazon’s move o" Oracle caused Prime Day outage in one of its
biggest warehouses, internal report says. https://www.cnbc.com/2018/10/23/
amazonmove-o"-oracle-caused-prime-day-outage-in-warehouse.html. Last
access: July 21, 2025.
[21] CockroachDB. 2016. How online schema changes are possible in CockroachDB. https://www.cockroachlabs.com/blog/how-online-schema-changesarepossible-in-cockroachdb/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[22] CockroachDB. 2020. Nested transactions in CockroachDB 20.1. https://www.
cockroachlabs.com/blog/nested-transactions-in-cockroachdb-20-1/. Last access:
July 21, 2025.
[23] Fábio Coelho, João Paulo, Ricardo Vilaça, José Pereira, and Rui Oliveira. 2017.
Htapbench: Hybrid transactional and analytical processing benchmark. In ICPE.
[24] Richard Cole, Florian Funke, Leo Giakoumakis, Wey Guy, Alfons Kemper, Stefan
Krompass, Harumi Kuno, Raghunath Nambiar, Thomas Neumann, Meikel Poess,
et al. 2011. The mixed workload CH-benCHmark. In DBTest.
[25] Eclipse Collections. 2024. https://github.com/eclipse/eclipse-collections. Last
access: July 21, 2025.
[26] James C Corbett, Je"rey Dean, Michael Epstein, Andrew Fikes, Christopher Frost,
Je"rey John Furman, Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser,
Peter Hochschild, et al. 2013. Spanner: Google’s globally distributed database.
TOCS (2013).
[27] Datanami. 2021.
Graph Database Market Worth $5.1 Billion by 2026.
https://www.datanami.com/this-just-in/graph-database-market-worth-5-1billion-by-2026/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[28] Jean-Charles Delvenne, Michael T Schaub, Sophia N Yaliraki, and Mauricio
Barahona. 2013. The stability of a graph partition: A dynamics-based framework

4789

[62] Ian Robinson, Jim Webber, and Emil Eifrem. 2015. Graph databases: new opportunities for connected data.
[63] Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. 2015. The Network Data Repository with
Interactive Graph Analytics and Visualization. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth
AAAI Conference on Arti!cial Intelligence. http://networkrepository.com
[64] Raghav Sethi, Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips, Wenlei Xie,
Yutian Sun, Nezih Yegitbasi, Haozhun Jin, Eric Hwang, Nileema Shingte, et al.
2019. Presto: SQL on everything. In ICDE.
[65] Yangjun Sheng, Anthony Tomasic, Tieying Zhang, and Andrew Pavlo. 2019.
Scheduling OLTP transactions via learned abort prediction. In aiDM.
[66] Isabelle Stanton and Gabriel Kliot. 2012. Streaming graph partitioning for large
distributed graphs. In SIGKDD.
[67] Gábor Szárnyas, Jack Waudby, Benjamin A Steer, Dávid Szakállas, Altan Birler,
Mingxi Wu, Yuchen Zhang, and Peter Boncz. 2022. The LDBC social network
benchmark: Business intelligence workload. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2022).
[68] Georgios Theodorakis, James Clarkson, and Jim Webber. 2024. Aion: E#cient
Temporal Graph Data Management.. In EDBT.
[69] Georgios Theodorakis, James Clarkson, and Jim Webber. 2024. An Empirical
Evaluation of Variable-length Record B+ Trees on a Modern Graph Database
System. In ICDEW.
[70] Georgios Theodorakis, Alexandros Koliousis, Peter Pietzuch, and Holger Pirk.
2020. Lightsaber: E#cient window aggregation on multi-core processors. In
SIGMOD.
[71] Alexander Thomson and Daniel J Abadi. 2010. The case for determinism in
database systems. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2010).
[72] Alexander Thomson, Thaddeus Diamond, Shu-Chun Weng, Kun Ren, Philip Shao,
and Daniel J Abadi. 2012. Calvin: fast distributed transactions for partitioned
database systems. In SIGMOD.
[73] Boyu Tian, Jiamin Huang, Barzan Mozafari, and Grant Schoenebeck. 2018.
Contention-aware lock scheduling for transactional databases. Proc. VLDB

Endow. (2018).
[74] TigerGraph. 2024. https://www.tigergraph.com/. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[75] Bing Tong, Yan Zhou, Chen Zhang, Jianheng Tang, Jing Tang, Leihong Yang,
Qiye Li, Manwu Lin, Zhongxin Bao, Jia Li, et al. 2024. Galaxybase: A High
Performance Native Distributed Graph Database for HTAP. Proc. VLDB Endow.
(2024).
[76] TPC. 2010. TPC BENCHMARK C Standard Speci!cation Revision 5.11 . https:
//www.tpc.org/TPC_Documents_Current_Versions/pdf/tpc-c_v5.11.0.pdf. Last
access: July 21, 2025.
[77] TPC. 2022. TPC BENCHMARK H (Decision Support) Standard Speci!cation
Revision 3.0.1. https://www.tpc.org/TPC_Documents_Current_Versions/pdf/
TPC-H_v3.0.1.pdf. Last access: July 21, 2025.
[78] Charalampos Tsourakakis, Christos Gkantsidis, Bozidar Radunovic, and Milan
Vojnovic. 2014. Fennel: Streaming graph partitioning for massive scale graphs.
In WSDM.
[79] Stephen Tu, Wenting Zheng, Eddie Kohler, Barbara Liskov, and Samuel Madden.
2013. Speedy transactions in multicore in-memory databases. In SOSP.
[80] Johan Ugander and Lars Backstrom. 2013. Balanced label propagation for partitioning massive graphs. In WSDM.
[81] Jack Waudby, Paul Ezhilchelvan, Jim Webber, and Isi Mitrani. 2020. Preserving
reciprocal consistency in distributed graph databases. In PaPoC.
[82] Huanhuan Wu, James Cheng, Silu Huang, Yiping Ke, Yi Lu, and Yanyan Xu. 2014.
Path problems in temporal graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2014).
[83] Reynold S Xin, Joseph E Gonzalez, Michael J Franklin, and Ion Stoica. 2013.
Graphx: A resilient distributed graph system on spark. In GRADES.
[84] Chaoqun Zhan, Maomeng Su, Chuangxian Wei, Xiaoqiang Peng, Liang Lin,
Sheng Wang, Zhe Chen, Feifei Li, Yue Pan, Fang Zheng, et al. 2019. AnalyticDB:
real-time OLAP database system at Alibaba cloud. Proc. VLDB Endow. (2019).

4790
