Towards Principled, Practical Document Database Design
Michael Carey

Wail Alkowaileet

Nick DiGeronimo

UC Irvine and Couchbase, Inc.
mjcarey@ics.uci.edu

Saudi National Center for AI (NCAI)
walkowaileet@nic.gov.sa

UC Irvine
nick@nickdigeronimo.dev

Peeyush Gupta

Sachin Smotra

Till Westmann

Couchbase, Inc.
peeyush.gupta@couchbase.com

Dataworkz, Inc.
sachin@dataworkz.io

Couchbase, Inc.
till@couchbase.com

ABSTRACT

design choices (such as indexing) are made based on the features
provided by the target database management system.
For the first two decades in database history, commercial database systems were based on data models that were quite physical in
nature, e.g., the hierarchical model of IBM’s IMS system or the network (CODASYL DBTG) model [22]. Their use required application
developers and data analysts to write programs to carefully navigate through data structures and to perform look-ups in indexes
to achieve acceptable performance. As a result, database design involved thoroughly understanding the physics of a given database’s
intended application(s), and adding to or changing an application
required rethinking the database’s design. This changed in a revolutionary manner when Ted Codd introduced the relational model,
with its declarative, set-oriented query interface, thereby gifting us
with data independence – the ability to change a database’s physical structure without having to reprogram the applications that
use it (and vice versa) – and with the ability to support unforseen
ad hoc queries. Owing to the usability of languages like Quel and
SQL and their resulting productivity gains, commercial relational
database systems appeared and largely displaced their commercial
predecessors for new applications over the course of the 1980s.
The database design process was similarly revolutionized by the
arrival of relational database systems. Relational database systems
enabled a data-first approach to database design in which the physical database design step is last and can be performed separately
from the conceptual and logical design steps, serving to tune the
database "under the hood" to the application(s) needs without affecting the logical structure of the database. Similarly, changes in
an application’s performance requirements (e.g., the need for new
or different queries) can be addressed via such tuning (e.g., the
creation of a new index) at the physical level alone. This is Ted
Codd’s legacy – thank you, Ted! – resulting in today’s thriving,
nearly $80 billion dollar relational database software market.
Five decades after Codd’s revolution, the world is different. Relational database systems remain the dominant technology in the
database market [34], but today’s application requirements are
much more demanding in terms of scale, performance, and schema
flexibility. In addition, the kinds of data that now need to be managed, in terms of their variety and regularity (or lack thereof), is
very different. These changes have led over the last two decades
to the creation and deployment – in serious production use – of
alternative, so-called NoSQL1 , database systems [20, 31, 34]. These
include key-value stores, column-family database systems, document database systems, and graph database systems.

Relational database design is a well-understood process enabled by
a combination of database theory (e.g., normal forms) as well as
conceptual modeling (e.g., ER-based design). In contrast, database
design for NoSQL databases, notably document databases, is often
approached in a much more ad hoc manner. It is frequently driven
by application details and physical considerations that muddy the
design process in ways all too reminiscent of the pre-relational
database era. In this paper, we argue for a return to sanity – for a
logical, data-first, conceptually grounded approach to document
database design. We explain how such an approach can work, yielding a clean, query-friendly document database design. We also
highlight a collection of document (JSON) anti-patterns to avoid.
The process and the anti-patterns both stem from the authors’ experiences in current and past lives when dealing with a wide variety
of JSON document data from commercial applications, government
applications, and university research applications.
PVLDB Reference Format:
Michael Carey, Wail Alkowaileet, Nick DiGeronimo, Peeyush Gupta,
Sachin Smotra, and Till Westmann. Towards Principled, Practical
Document Database Design. PVLDB, 18(12): 4804-4816, 2025.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750606

1

INTRODUCTION

As the popular saying from Spider-Man goes, "With great power
comes great responsibility." Since their inception in the 1960s, database management systems have served as a powerful tool for storing, managing, and analyzing information, both for powering interactive applications as well as supporting downstream business
intelligence activities. To effectively harness that power, the activity of database design has been a key problem in the database
field from the outset. As described in modern database textbooks
(e.g., [28, 33]) and summarized in [35], three key components of
the database design process are: (1) conceptual design, where the
information requirements for a given database are captured and
modeled; (2) logical design, where the conceptual design is translated into a design expressed in terms of a data model (e.g., the
relational model); and (3) physical design, where various physical
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view a copy of
this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain permission by
emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to the VLDB Endowment.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 18, No. 12 ISSN 2150-8097.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750606

1 NoSQL initially stood for "no SQL", but today it is commonly said to mean "not only

SQL", as many NoSQL systems now offer SQL-inspired query interfaces as well.

4804

Universe(custid, name, street, city, zipcode, rating, orderno, order_date, ship_date,
itemno, qty, price, category, kind, name, descrip, manuf, listprice, power, size)

...

...

(a)

Customers(custid, name, street, city, zipcode, rating)
Orders(orderno, custid, order_date, ship_date)

(b)

LineItems(orderno, itemno, qty, price)

Customers1(custid, name)
Customers2(custid, street)
Customers3(custid, city)
Customers4(custid, zipcode)
Customers5(custid, rating)

(c)

Orders1(orderno, custid)
Orders2(orderno, order_date)
Orders3(orderno, ship_date)
LineItems1(orderno, itemno, qty)
LineItems2(orderno, itemno, price)

Products(itemno, kind, name, descrip, manuf, listprice)

Products1(itemno, kind)
Products2(itemno, name)
Products3(itemno, descrip)
Products4(itemno, manuf)
Products5(itemno, listprice)

ProductsCategories(itemno, category)
ProductsElectric(itemno, power)
ProductsClothing (itemno, size)

ProductsCategories(itemno, category)
ProductsElectric(itemno, power)
ProductsClothing (itemno, size)

Figure 1: A Few Alternative Relational Designs.
in which decisions are made about the file organizations, index
structures, and partitioning options for the tables.

Spanish philosopher George Santayana (in The Life of Reason,
1905) stated: “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned
to repeat it.” NoSQL database systems originated outside the relational database community, and Santayana’s adage has unfortunately been borne out in the database design methodologies being
commonly recommended by their vendors and consultants. NoSQL
designers have been guided to return to design methods that are
much more application-first and physical rather than being datafirst in nature. (Sorry, Ted...!) One goal of this paper is to stem that
tide by showing how a data-first approach can be used effectively,
given the nature of today’s document database systems. A second
goal is to present a set of document design anti-patterns that should
be avoided regardless of the design approach being followed.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
reviews the relational database design process, briefly discussing
both normalization theory and ER-based design thinking. Section
3 then delves into document database design, discussing flexible
schemas and current design practices followed by recommending
a methodology that flows from an ER model (similar to relational
database design). Section 4 presents a set of document anti-patterns
that are either dangerous or query-unfriendly or both; these patterns have been encountered in practice by one or more of the
authors. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2

2.1

Normalization Theory

Given the information needed for a given application, the problem
for the relational database designer is to come up with a "good" set
of tables in which to store the required information. As a simple
example, Figure 1 shows three alternative designs for a database
involving customers, products, and the orders placed by customers
for products. As a first option, Figure 1(a) sketches how the entire database’s worth of information could be stored in one large
spreadsheet-like "universal" table (with the table’s primary key
columns being underlined). As an alternative, Figure 1(b) shows
what will likely strike most readers as a more natural design where
the information has been decomposed into multiple tables that
separate the information about customers, products, and orders.
Figure 1(c) shows a third alternative design in which the tables
of the second alternative have been further decomposed into an
extreme design in which each piece of information (each "fact")
lives in its very own table. In this last design the tables’ common
primary keys hold the separated values together logically.
All of these designs can hold the application’s information – but
which is a "good" design, and which might be viewed as the "best"
design? Functional dependencies and normalization theory were
invented to answer these questions by giving relational database
designers the tools to formulate or improve on a given relational
database design by decomposing its current table(s) into a set of
tables that minimize redundancy – i.e., into a design that avoids
storing a given fact, like that the name of customer "C13" is "T.
Cody", in more than one row of a table in the database. Figure 1(a)
is clearly not a good design, as it will store an instance of this fact
over and over, once for each line item in each order placed by a

RELATIONAL DATABASE DESIGN

There are two main tools used in relational database design: normalization theory, and ER modeling followed by ER-to-relational
schema translation. We review both here as an important precursor
to proposing our recommendation for document database design
in Section 3, as we will show how a number of these principles
also apply there. Both tools lead to a logical schema, i.e., a set of
relational tables. This is then followed by a physical design step

4805

Table 1: Dependency-Driven Relational Database Design
Normal Form

Description

1NF
2NF
3NF
BCNF
4NF, 5NF (PJNF)

All fields must be atomic (i.e., scalar)
Avoid partial dependencies on PK (using FDs)
Avoid transitive dependencies on PK (using FDs)
Avoid “all” remaining redundancy (using FDs)
Avoid “nesting” redundancies (using MVDs)

given customer. This redundancy will waste space, obviously, and
it will also waste time since every row where "C13" appears as the
customer id will have to be updated if the customer requests that
their name be updated (e.g., to "Thomas Cody"). It also introduces
room for inconsistent data if some rows are somehow missed by
the application when a name change occurs.
Functional dependencies (FDs) provide a formal notation for
capturing such facts. The FD 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 → 𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 captures the fact that
a given customer id should only have one name associated with it
in the database, so wherever those two fields appear together in a
table, the name known to be associated with a given customer id
should be the same. This example FD can be read as "the customer
id determines the name". Given a proposed database design and a
set of FDs that properly model which fields determine which other
fields, normalization theory provides a way to arrive at a design
that minimizes redundancy. As the relational design problem was
studied, researchers identified a series of normal forms – based on
FDs – that avoid various ways in which redundancy can crop up in
a given relational schema design.
Without going into great detail, Table 1 lists the major normal
forms as we know them today along with the kinds of FD-related
problems that they avoid [28, 33]. 1NF is different from the others
and is simply the relational model’s rule that each field in a table
must be atomic (a scalar value). The other normal forms each aim to
avoid potential redundancies. 2NF avoids situations where a table
has a composite key, like a primary key (PK) of (𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑, 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜),
and has non-key fields that are involved in facts (FDs) that depend
on some but not all of the PK fields. Such facts would be redundantly
stored for each 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑/𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜 pair. 3NF avoids problems that 2NF
would miss where there is a transitive dependency on a PK that
could also lead to redundant fact storage.2 Lastly, in terms of FDs,
BCNF avoids certain corner cases where redundancy can be hiding
within the fields of a composite primary key.
The bottom row in Table 1 lists two additional normal forms,
4NF and 5NF (a.k.a. PJNF), that address potential redundancies
due to dependencies involving what would be nested fields if the
relational model didn’t insist on all fields being atomic. In our
example, associated with a given product is a set of categories, so
wherever the product’s id (𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜) field appears together in a table
with a category field (𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦), a given id value should always be
associated with the same set of category values across the rows
of the table. This can be captured with the addition of the notion

of a multivalued dependency (MVD), e.g., 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜 →→ 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦
in this example. (A good mental model is to think about the set of
categories associated with a product being functionally dependent
on the product’s id, 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜.)
As it turns out, Figure 1(b) is the relational design that one would
obtain by starting from the Universe table and then using functional
dependency theory to decompose it (normalize it) into a nice BCNF
equivalent. Figure 1(a) is only in 1NF. Figure 1(c) also turns out to
be in BCNF and avoids redundant storage, but decomposing tables
to that extent would lead to more difficult querying (lots of joins)
and more expensive updates (lots of little updates).

2.2

ER Modeling

An alternative path to arriving at a "good" relational database design
is based on the seminal work of Peter Chen from the mid-1970’s on
the Entity-Relationship (ER) model [23] and its subsequent extensions. This path involves (1) capturing the conceptual data model
for an application (or set of applications) in the form of an extended
ER model and then (2) translating the conceptual data model into
a logical data model, in this case a relational one. The ER model
for an application expresses the information that’s needed in terms
of entities, relationships, and attributes. Later extensions to Chen’s
initial ER model include support for modeling composite attributes,
multivalued attributes, and inheritance [28, 33].
To illustrate step (1), Figure 2 shows an extended ER model for
the simple commerce database that we have thus far been describing
informally or relationally. This model was inspired by the sample
data in Appendix A of Don Chamberlin’s SQL++ book [21], but it
includes some extensions to his example data that we will utilize in
Section 3 when we explain how to translate from an extended ER
design into a document database “schema”. To explain the extended
ER model in a nutshell, here is what Figure 2’s model is saying:
• There is an entity set called Customers. A Customers entity
has four attributes, 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 (which is its key), 𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒, 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠,
and 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔. The attribute 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 is composite (nested) and
has sub-attributes 𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑡, 𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦, and 𝑧𝑖𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒.
• There is an entity set called Orders with attributes 𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜
(its key), 𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟 _𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒, and 𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝_𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒.
• There is a one-to-many relationship Place to relate each
Customers entity to its associated Orders entities.
• There is a weak entity set called Items with attributes 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑛𝑜
(its key), 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦, and 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒. (The double lines in the figure
express the entity set’s weak-ness.)
• Each entity in the Items entity set is existence-dependent
on a parent entity in Orders. This is modeled by the weak

2 E.g., if we wanted to record which continent a customer is from along with that conti-

nent’s name (region), size, and population, the FDs 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 → 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 and 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 →
𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 would lead to the transitive dependency 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 → 𝑝𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 , warning us not to store region facts in the same table as customer facts lest we redundantly
repeat region facts for each customer.

4806

Table 2: ER-Driven Relational Database Design
ER Concept

Relational Artifact

Entity
Relationship (M:N)
Relationship (1:N)
Composite attribute
Multivalued attribute
Inheritance hierarchy

1

name

city

N

Place

Customers

Orders

order_date
ship_date

address

zipcode

relationship table and resulting unnecessary joins if so desired. An
example of this can be seen in Figure 1(b), where the Orders entity
table includes the field 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 rather than introducing a separate
table with (𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑, 𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜) pairs to relate customers and orders.
We turn now to translating the extensions of Chen’s original
model. Since the relational model does not allow data to be nested,
composite attributes have been flattened3 in the relational schema.
Again due to no nesting, multivalued attributes result in the need
for a side table (𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑠𝐶𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 in our example) where the
multiple values can be held and associated with the entity table’s
key field value. Inheritance can be modeled in several ways, but
the most common one, used here, is to have side tables for each
subtype to hold its additional fields. Again, Figure 1(b) shows the
complete relational translation result for Figure 2.

orderno

custid
street

Table with entity’s attributes and PK
Table with relationship’s attributes and FKs
Merge relationship table into N-side’s entity table
Use a flattened column naming convention
Add separate side table with entity’s PK as FK
Delta tables or mashup table

1

rating

Contain
itemno

N

category

1

N

Products

name

For

Items

lineno
quantity

descrip

price

manuf

IsA

not covering
disjoint

listprice
size

Clothing

Electric

power

Figure 2: Extended ER Model for a Commerce Example.

2.3

Relational Design Today

As mentioned above, both the normalization approach and the
ER approach lead to the same final result in this case. So how
are the two aforementioned approaches used in practice today? If
one is given a set of tables to improve, with no accompanying ER
model, normalization theory can help. It is more common nowadays,
however, for a relational schema to be designed via the ER path
since it is more intuitive and it nicely documents the data model.
Moreover, done right, an ER model’s relational translation will yield
a 3NF or BCNF design; problem solved. Lastly, given a relational
schema resulting from either approach, the final step would be
physical design (a.k.a. tuning), including the selection of indexes to
be created to accelerate the application’s queries.

1:N relationship, Contain, which relates each Items entity
(a line item) of an order to its containing Orders entity.
• There is an entity set called Products with attributes 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜
(its key), 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦, 𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒), 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡, 𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑢 𝑓 , and 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒.
The attribute 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 is multivalued, so a Products entity
may have several category values.
• The Products entity has two entity subtypes, Clothing and
Electric products, each having its own additional attributes
(𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 for Clothing products, 𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 for Electric products). A
given Products entity instance can be a regular product or
it can be one of the product subtypes.
• There is a 1:N relationship called For that relates each Items
entity to the Products entity that that line item is for.

3

Given an ER diagram produced by step (1), like the example
that we just walked through, step (2) involves translating the ER
diagram into an appropriate relational schema. Table 2 lists how
each feature in a given extended ER diagram is typically translated
into tables. Figure 1(b), introduced earlier, shows what Table 2’s
translation process would produce when given Figure 2’s ER diagram. Notice how in Figure 1(b) the entity sets have become tables
with appropriate primary key fields and other fields. Had there
been an M:N relationship, it would have become a table whose primary key is a composite of the primary keys from the two related
tables. If a relationship has attributes, which is not the case here,
they would appear as additional fields in the relationship table. 1:N
relationships can be modeled in the same way, but their primary
keys are just the key from the N side; as a result, their fields can
be included in the N side’s entity table to avoid having a separate

DOCUMENT DATABASE DESIGN

We have now seen, or been reminded of, how database design is
handled in the relational world based on Ted Codd’s gift of data independence. In this section we explain how that gift can be applied
in the document database world. We first discuss "schemas" in that
world and review common current practices and/or recommendations for document database design. We then explain and make
the case for a data-first approach based on ER modeling and data
independence. We conclude by briefly discussing some physical
considerations that might feed back into the design process.

3 One minor detail in our example is that since 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 is a composite attribute, a

purely mechanical translation would likely name the tables fields for the nested ER
attributes 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 _𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑡 , 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 _𝑐𝑖𝑡 𝑦 , and 𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 _𝑧𝑖𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒 .

4807

orders:

customers:
linking
{ "custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101= },
"rating": 750
}, ...

{ "orderno": 1002,
"custid": "C13",
"order_date": "2017-05-01",
"ship_date": "2017-05-03",
"items": [
{ "itemno": 460,
"qty": 95,
"price": 100.99 },
embedding
{ "itemno": 680,
"qty": 150,
"price": 8.75}
]
}, ...

aggregate
object

Even in the absence of a predefined schema, an order management application, for example, will be written based on expectations about what it may encounter in the database’s collections.
The program would be "surprised" if one of the objects in the orders
collection is a customer, or if one of the order objects is missing
an expected 𝑐𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑑 field indicating which customer placed it. As
a result, when storing and manipulating document data, it is still
the case that the schema(s) of the database’s collections must be
well-designed. Indeed, schema design for document databases is
every bit as important as relational database design – perhaps more
so, in fact, as document database systems have richer data models
and provide fewer "guardrails".

products:
{ "itemno": 460,
"category": ["music", =fashion"],
"name": "Fender Bender T-Shirt",
"descrip": "Extra Large T-Shirt for
Fender Bender fans",
"manuf": "Fender Bender",
"listprice": 34.99,
"kind": "clothing",
"size": "XL"
},
{
"itemno": 680,
"category": ["music", =fashion"],
"name": "Fender Bender Tank Top",
"descrip": "Medium Tank Top for
Fender Bender fans",
"manuf": "Fender Bender",
"listprice": 29.99,
"kind": "clothing",
"size": "M"
}, ...

3.2

Figure 3: Document Database Design Concepts.

3.1

Current "Best" Practices

As discussed earlier, database design for the pre-relational database
systems of the B.C. ("Before Codd") era was application-first in
nature. One had to think physically to ensure a proper data organization that could support efficient navigation by the application.
One also had to rethink things when new requirements cropped up,
potentially modifying both the data organization and the existing
application to account for the additional requirements.
Unfortunately, the current database design processes being recommended for NoSQL database systems, including document database systems, have regressed to being much more physical in
nature. Figure 3 shows that the data relationships in document
databases can be represented either via embedding (nesting) or
linking (relational-style value matching). Embedding is commonly
pushed in favor of linking due to system limitations. CosmosDB [14],
DynamoDB [1], and Cassandra [5] all lack support for joining data
across collections, offering only single-collection query capabilities.
Thus, data that needs to be accessed together needs to be stored together in these systems, or else the application programmer will be
forced to deal with the additional complexity of writing applicationlevel joins. In contrast, for document database systems whose query
languages do support joins, like MongoDB [11], Apache AsterixDB [3, 19], and Couchbase [2, 7, 17, 26], the database designer
has a wider range of choices in terms of when and why to favor
linking over embedding or vice versa – to join or not to join – as
we will discuss further in the next section.
Another challenge for database designers targeting DynamoDB,
Cassandra, or CosmosDB is that they prominently expose their
distributed data partitioning scheme(s) and per-partition storage
organizations as part of the logical database design process. A collection’s primary key is a carefully crafted composite of fields that
serve to first guide partition formation and then guide the storage
order of data within a partition, which is much more than the simple notion of a primary key being just a unique identifier in the ER
or relational models. Careful key design is thus a critical aspect of
database design for those systems, and getting it wrong can lead
to something between poor performance and terrible performance
(full scans of all data in all partitions) or the inability to execute
certain queries at all. (E.g., Apache Cassandra won’t filter on nonkey columns by default, requiring ALLOW FILTERING to explicitly
be specified in a query.) Applications that need to efficiently access
data from several angles, e.g., with different predicates or different

Document Schemas

Document databases are known for their schema flexibility, i.e., for
supporting collections of semistructured data that can be nested,
heterogeneous, and/or schemaless [31]. Most document databases
today have adopted self-describing data models based on JSON [10].
Examples, in alphabetical order, include: Apache AsterixDB [3, 19],
CosmosDB [14], Couchbase [2, 7, 17, 26], DynamoDB [1], and last
but certainly not least, MongoDB [11]. Cassandra [5] is another
well-known NoSQL database system, but it is different in that while
it supports nesting, it is less flexible because it expects collections
(flat or nested tables) to have predefined schemas expressed using
a user model provided for data definition purposes.4
As explained nicely in [31], the notion of a schema is still present
in document databases. Applications that use document databases
still have to be written based on the objects in the database and
the information that they contain – it’s just that the knowledge of
the schema is embedded within the application code rather than
being explicitly defined within and managed by the database. There
are advantages and disadvantages to such schemalessness, but the
ability for the data in the database to evolve quickly, i.e., to have
schema fluidity as applications evolve, is one of several reasons
that document databases have gained favor in a growing number
of application areas.
Figure 3, which we will revisit again later, shows an example
of the collections of documents that a document database system
might store to support our commerce-inspired running example.
Rather than the seven "flat" tables of Figure 1(b), here we have
three collections, one for customers, one for orders, and one for
products. Each object, at least conceptually, is self-describing; it
comes with both field names and field values. Fields can be nested,
and different objects might have more, fewer, or different fields
than other objects. For example, customers outside the US might
have different address information; orders that haven’t shipped yet
might not have a 𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑝_𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 field at all; different kinds of products
might have different fields.
4 Cassandra is commonly referred to as being a "wide-column store", not a document

store, and its data model is not JSON-based [6].

4808

combinations of fields, have to maintain several copies of the same
data with appropriately supportive keys.
Other document database systems have much less restrictive
query capabilities, including language support for multi-collection
queries like joins and subqueries. Such systems include MongoDB,
Couchbase, and Apache AsterixDB. Historically, however, MongoDB and Couchbase started their lives as distributed key-value
JSON document stores [13, 17]. Aggregation, joins, and multi-object
transactions were not initially available in MongoDB, and similarly
in Couchbase Server, so one still finds remnants of "physical thinking" and a preference for embedding over linking in some of their
current materials on recommended JSON database design practices.

3.3

frameworks for the NoSQL world, e.g., NoAM [16]. The goal of this
section is to show how one can methodically start with the familiar
and time-tested ER model and end up with a "good" document
database design consisting of collections of JSON objects.
Before proceeding down the ER path, it is worth taking a quick
historical detour to make two points. First, nested database design
is not a new problem. Significant research attention was paid in
the 1980’s to the idea of generalizing SQL’s flat relational model to
support nested tables and building systems to support such a model
(e.g., [30, 32]); the line items of an order could then be stored more
naturally as a nested 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑠 table field in each row of the orders table,
for example. This is referred to as the non-first normal form (𝑁 𝐹 2 )
relational model. Second, it is common today, but actually wrong,
for nested document schemas to be referred to as "denormalized".
While such schemas are indeed not in 1NF, it is still possible for
nested designs to be normalized to avoid redundancy in a "one fact,
one place" sense that the other relational normal forms do, and
the late 1980’s saw the use of MVDs to guide the design of normal
forms for nested tables [27, 29]. However, for the same reason that
ER modeling has largely displaced functional dependency-based
design in the relational world, here we will follow the ER path
rather than a path based on nested normalization theory. We will
reflect later on how proper ER-model-to-JSON-schema translation
will indeed lead to a non-redundant document database design.

From ER Designs to Documents

As we described in Section 2, the first step in modern best practices
for relational database design is to use ER (or similarly UML [31])
modeling to capture the conceptual model for the desired database.
ER modeling is also recommended by some as a good initial step in
the document (and other NoSQL) database design process [8, 24],
while others quickly move into recommending product-specific
models [6] or focus the bulk of their recommendations on the
question "if you would have had these tables in the SQL world, how
would you model their data in the document world instead?" [8, 12].
There have also been a few proposals for new conceptual modeling

Figure 4: Some Alternative Nested Database Designs.

4809

Table 3: ER-Driven Document Database Design
ER Concept
Entity
Relationship (M:N)
Relationship (1:N)
Composite attribute
Weak entity
Multivalued attribute
Inheritance hierarchy

Document Artifact
Collection with entity’s attributes and PK
Collection with relationship’s attributes and FKs (linking)
Merge relationship collection into N-side’s entity collection
Use nested object (embedding)
Use nested object (embedding)
Use nested array (embedding)
Use entity collection with subtype indicator field(s)

We return now to our main path, the sharing of our ER-driven
data-first document database design methodology for full-featured
document database systems. We have seen that one of the central
design decisions, hinted at in Figure 3, is the question of when
and why to use linking versus embedding to tie data together –
in other words, how to determine the aggregate objects for an
application. Figure 4 sketches some of the different choices that one
might make, at least in principle. Figure 4(a) shows the choice that
would lead to the three collections of Figure 3. Figure 4(b) shows
a more deeply nested alternative where each customer’s orders
are nested inside the customer object. Figure 4(c) shows a truly
extreme nested alternative where the whole database is a single
JSON object; obviously undesirable, yet not impossible. Last but not
least, Figure 4(d) shows an alternative where the document schema
is flat and similar to a BCNF relational database design. So which
of these might be characterized as a "good" design, and why, and
how might one methodically arrive at that design?
It is important to point out that the choice between targeting a
relational or document database for a given application should not
affect its conceptual data model. Thus, the decisions that identify
the entities, relationships, and attributes for a document database
application can follow the usual textbook approaches to ER design [28, 33]. The pertinent question for ER-driven document database design, then, is how to take an ER model as input and produce
a good document database schema. Table 3 summarizes what we
believe is a principled, practical, and easily mastered approach to
creating JSON database designs from ER models. This approach
has been tested with success over a period of over five years in a
university setting. It has been used in a UC Irvine undergraduate
database course, COMPSCI 122A: Introduction to Data Management,
to teach several thousand students – in 1-2 weeks – how to design
JSON schemas for Apache AsterixDB after learning the principles
of ER modeling and relational database design and SQL. It has
also been used by hundreds of students in a follow-on elective,
COMPSCI 122D: Beyond SQL Data Management, to design and deploy databases for MongoDB, Couchbase Server, and Couchbase
Analytics starting from an ER model.
Taking a closer look at the translation approach laid out in Table 3, we initially see similarities with the relational mappings of
Table 2. Entity sets here become collections of JSON objects whose
fields correspond to the entity’s attributes. M:N relationships, again

(a)

vin

custid

street

name

city

M

Customers

N

Owner

Vehicle

model

address

zipcode

make

year

rating

(b)
customer
...

vehicle
...

vehicles

owners

Figure 5: A Dual Array Option for Small M:N Relationships.

very similar to the relational case, become collections of JSON objects that use linking to model the entity-to-entity relationships.5
And also as in the relational case, the relationship information (link
and relationship attributes) for a 1:N relationship can optionally
be placed in the N-side’s entity collection to minimize the number
of collections. Where the document versus relational differences
emerge is when mapping the ER model’s extended and more advanced features. Since JSON allows nesting, composite attributes
in the ER model can be mapped to nested objects in JSON. Similarly, since JSON supports arrays, multivalued attributes (whether
scalars or objects) can be mapped to array-valued fields in JSON.
Weak entities are semantically similar to multivalued composite
attributes and can be similarly mapped in JSON. Last but not least,
since JSON schemas are flexible regarding which fields are present
or absent, the objects in an inheritance hierarchy can be kept in a
single collection whose objects are variations on the entity’s theme
(along with a field or fields that serve to indicate which subtype(s)
a given object belongs to).
To illustrate the results of these ER to JSON feature mapping
guidelines, it turns out (not coincidentally) that Figure 3 from earlier turns out to show the sample document structures that Table 3’s mappings produce when applied to the running commerce
ER model example from Figure 2. Some details to notice are that
𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠 is a nested, object-valued field of customers, 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑠 is a
nested array of objects in orders, and 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑦 is a nested array
5 One possible modeling exception for the M:N case would be to use nested arrays
of links on each side to “cut out the middleman” if the arrays will be small on both
sides. Figure 5 illustrates this option, showing how a relationship between Customers
and Vehicles could utilize it if the commerce ER model were extended to keep track of
customers’ vehicles.

4810

SELECT c.*, o.* FROM customers c, orders o WHERE c.custid = o.custid AND ...

(b)

SELECT * FROM products WHERE ...
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE ...
SELECT * FROM orders o, o.items i WHERE ...

...
product

(a)

customer

order

address

items
item

clothing product

item

IsA

CREATE INDEX
ON customers (name)

product
electric_product

product

electric product

product

CREATE INDEX
ON customers (address.city)

clothing_product
clothing product

CREATE INDEX
ON products (listprice)

...
CREATE INDEX ON orders (shipdate)
CREATE INDEX ON orders (custid)
CREATE INDEX ON orders (items.itemno)

...
Figure 8: Query Entry Points and Indexing Considerations.
Figure 6: Modeling an IsA Relationship.
...
{ "itemno": 375,
"category": ["music"],
"name": "Stratuscaster Guitar",
"manuf": "Fender Bender",
"listprice": 149.99
},
{ "itemno": 780,
"category": ["essentials", "kitchen"],
"name": "Automatic Beer Opener",
"descrip": "Robotic beer bottle opener",
"manuf": "Robo Brew",
"listprice": 29.95,
"kind": "electric",
"power": "AA batteries=
},
{ "itemno": 460,
"category": ["music", =fashion"],
"name": "Fender Bender T-Shirt",
"descrip": "Extra Large T-Shirt for Fender Bender fans",
"manuf": "Fender Bender",
"listprice": 34.99,
"kind": "clothing",
"size": "XL=
},
...

and that can be modified later, as needed, without affecting the
application’s query statements. As a result, those systems provide
physical data independence similar to the relational model.
Figure 8 sketches how the document mapping guidelines, based
on following the ER model’s choices about entity sets, will provide
target applications with a convenient set of entry points for querying purposes. Queries that are just focused on customers can target
just that one collection, and likewise for queries that focus on just
orders or products. Queries that need to combine information from
several of the resulting collections, e.g., to ask about customers
and their orders, can use joins or subqueries to follow the intercollection links. To accelerate an application’s queries, indexes can
be created at the physical level, and more indexes can be added as
the application’s lookup needs evolve.
We would be remiss if we totally dismissed physical considerations (e.g., I/O) as being thought-worthy in the logical design phase.
For example, Figure 9 shows how nesting choices can affect the
read and/or write performance of an application. Figure 9(a) shows
the amount of data that might be read when querying orders in
a design with nested items, while Figure 9(b) shows how having
orders and items as separate JSON objects in separate collections
could save I/O for an application in which most orders queries
don’t require data about line items. Updates to orders could involve
a similar I/O consideration, as most systems don’t write partial
JSON objects. These considerations are not unique to JSON; similar
tradeoffs exist even in the relational world and sometimes lead
designers to vertically partition a table into multiple parallel tables.
It should also be mentioned that this I/O consideration may be less
of a factor for document database systems that employ a columnar
JSON storage format under the hood [2, 15].
Lastly, one other factor worth considering towards the end of the
JSON document design process is an application’s possible need for
fast access to information whose inclusion at a certain place in the
schema would lead to a degree of redundancy (i.e., to a "one fact,
one place" rule violation, likely violating 2NF or 3NF in relational
theory parlance). Again, this consideration is not unique to JSON;
e.g., Chapter 20 of [28] has a similar discussion related to relational
database design tuning. There is also a related JSON discussion
in [4] referred to as an "Extended Reference", and a discussion
involving nesting of "recent" JSON objects in [9].

Figure 7: JSON Objects from an IsA Hierarchy.
of strings in products. Figure 6 zooms in on the handling of 𝐼𝑠𝐴
hierarchies, with Figure 6(a) showing the entity type hierarchy for
product objects and Figure 6(b) showing them neatly co-existing in
a single products collection. Figure 7 shows a sample JSON object
of each type with a 𝑘𝑖𝑛𝑑 field6 indicating their particular subtype.

3.4

Other Design Considerations

The ER to JSON schema mapping methodology in the preceding section targets document database systems that are fully query-capable,
like MongoDB, Couchbase, and Apache AsterixDB. MongoDB’s
MQL query language (with its 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑑 and 𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒 interfaces) provides support for aggregation, joins, and subqueries, and queries
in Couchbase and Apache AsterixDB are based on SQL++ [18], a
JSON-oriented generalization of SQL. Decisions about data partitioning and indexing are treatable in those systems as physical layer
decisions that can be made after the logical design step is finished
6 If a single product could belong to multiple subtypes, i.e., if the 𝐼𝑠𝐴 relationship was

not disjoint, then a pair of boolean fields 𝑖𝑠 _𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔 and 𝑖𝑠 _𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐 would have
been needed as a subtype indicator instead.

4811

(a)

(b)

...
Figure 9: Scan-Related I/O Considerations.
user level perspective as well as being amenable to subsequent
optimization through indexing at the physical design level.
Before presenting our anti-patterns, i.e., our list of don’ts, we
should point out that our list is undoubtedly incomplete. For example, we would also encourage interested readers to check out the
set of patterns (both do’s and don’ts) that MongoDB has assembled
to guide their JSON schema designers [4]. While less top-down and
less prescriptive than our ER-based approach, having more of an "if
your JSON data currently looks like this, you might consider doing
that instead" flavor, their pattern set contains some well-explained
and valuable document design suggestions.

As a concrete example, a web page to display an order in our
commerce example would be more user-friendly if its list of line
items included the product name of each item in addition to its
𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑜. Retrieving this information in our "good" design requires a
join (albeit a small one). Product names will change rarely, while
order web pages will frequently be displayed, so one could opt to
add a 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡_𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 field to the objects in 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑠 and manage the
resulting redundancy by propagating name changes to places like
this where the 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜-𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 association is redundantly represented.
To informally quantify this trade-off, we had ChatGPT help us generate a scaled-up version of our example data with 100,000 products,
500,000 customers, and 1,000,000 orders with 1 to 5 line items each.
We loaded this data into the free tier of a document database service,
indexed orders on 𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜 and products on 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜, and then ran
40 executions of a query to retrieve the line items of a randomly
selected order. Without redundancy, the average server time for
the query was 5.1 msec and its roundtrip time from a laptop was 69
msec. With redundancy, the times were 2.4 msec (half the previous
server time) and 68 msec (roughly the same end-to-end latency).

4

4.1

Anti-Pattern 1: Unbounded Nesting

Figure 10 illustrates our first anti-pattern, which is to use embedding instead of linking in situations where the nested data may
grow without bound. Nesting line items within orders is a sensible
decision for the reasons covered earlier; a given order will likely
contain a reasonable number of line items. Nesting the entire order
history for a customer within a customer object, on the other hand,
is a recipe for disaster. In addition to negative I/O implications,
over-nesting can lead to the exhaustion of a system’s internal limits
on the size permitted for a single JSON object or a field thereof.
There is another, less drastic, but also inadvisable, variant of the
unbounded nesting anti-pattern where the orders objects are stored
in a separate collection while keeping an array of order references
within each customer. We have seen this variant in practice as well,
and while it postpones the eventual exhaustion problem, it is still
a form of unbounded nesting and will cause customer objects and
customer-order queries to become unruly over time.
The best cure for anti-pattern 1 is simply to follow the design
guidelines of Table 3 in the previous section.7 In this example the

PATTERNS AND ANTI-PATTERNS

The previous section offered a data-first design methodology for
document databases – in short, it presented a set of do’s for database
designers who are targeting applications at document database
systems that aren’t limited to single-collection queries. This section
offers a set of don’ts based on various anti-patterns that the authors
have encountered over the years in real-world JSON document
designs in both research and industrial settings. It is important
to point out that the don’ts presented here apply not just to fullfeatured document database systems but also to NoSQL database
systems with more limited query capabilities. For each anti-pattern
– i.e., each don’t – we provide an example of the anti-pattern, explain
why it should be avoided, and then suggest a cure in the form of a
pattern with the same (or greater) information capacity that avoids
its problems. As we will see, the overall theme will be to ensure
that the chosen document design is query-friendly, both from a

7We caution against attempting to work around this anti-pattern by "chunking" a

nested array into large blocks that, when exceeded, lead to the addition of another
copy of the upper-level object to hold the next array chunk. Unbounded nested arrays
should be treated as a call to use linking rather than embedding. However, on a
tangentially related note, MongoDB’s "Bucket Pattern" [4] is an interesting idea for
making intentional use of nesting and chunking in use cases like time series data.

4812

4.2

customer

Anti-Pattern 2: Data as Metadata

address

Figure 11 shows the next anti-pattern, which might be described
from a database point of view as confusing metadata and data. In
the relational world (of SQL tables), the system catalogs store the
metadata (field names and types) and the rows of a table store its
fields’ values; their query languages (usually SQL) are oriented in
this way. Query languages for document databases have their roots
in relational languages, albeit generalized to work against JSON
data. Figure 11 is an example of a collection that captures the daily
sales history from a company’s stores. In Figure 11(a) the designer
has structured the data to have a field named after the date and
whose value holds the sales volume for that date. Notice how this
decision makes it very awkward to write date range queries like
the one in the figure if the application needs to do so, either now
or in the future – and note that this design is not amenable to the
creation of a secondary index to speed up such queries.
The cure for anti-pattern 2, as shown in Figure 11(b), is to use
a more "databasey" design that avoids using data values as field
names – i.e., to separate what would be schema from what would be
data even though JSON databases are schemaless and make the antipattern possible. (It is worth mentioning that JSON exhibiting this
anti-pattern sometimes originates from map-oriented Javascript
libraries and their associated persistent stores [25].)
We have also encountered a more complex, nested variant of
anti-pattern 2 in practice (which we can probably thank Javascript
for as well). An example based on monthly sales data for stores
might have objects of the following form:

orders
customer

order

address

items
item

...
orders
order

order

items
item

items
item

...

...

order

order

items
item

items
item

...

...

...

Figure 10: Over-Nesting Doesn’t End Well.

(a)

(b)

SELECT *
FROM daily_sales d,
OBJECT_NAMES(d) AS field
...
WHERE MILLIS(field) IS NOT NULL
AND field >= "2020-01-01"
{
AND field < "2020-02-01"
"storeid": 288,
"2020-01-01": 1258.77
}
...
SELECT *
FROM daily_sales
...
WHERE day >= "2020-01-01"
{
AND day < "2020-02-01"
"storeid": 288,
"day": "2020-01-01",
"sales": 1258.77
}
...
CREATE INDEX ON daily_sales (day)

{"storeid": 288,
"data": {"2020": {"Q1": {"Jan": {"sales": 14999.99}}}}}

Applying the cure, based on "schema thinking", leads to the
following much more query- and index-friendly alternative that
doesn’t confuse data and metadata:

Figure 11: Don’t Confuse Metadata and Data.

...
{

{"storeid": 288,
"year": 2020,
"quarter": "Q1".
"month": "Jan",
"sales": 14999.99}

SELECT ds.storeid, ds.day, "680" AS itemno, `680`.num_sold
FROM daily_sales ds
WHERE `680`.num_sold > 2

"storeid": 288,
"day": "2020-01-01",
"120": 17,
(a)
"185": 86,
"460": 2,
"680": 33
SELECT ds.storeid, ds.day, ic.itemno, ic.num_sold
}
...
FROM daily_sales ds, ds.item_counts ic
WHERE ic.itemno = 680 AND ic.num_sold > 2
...
{
"storeid": 288,
"day": "2020-01-01",
"item_counts":
[ { "itemno": 120, "num_sold": 17 },
(b)
{ "itemno": 185, "num_sold": 86 },
{ "itemno": 460, "num_sold": 2 },
{ "itemno": 680, "num_sold": 33 }
]
CREATE INDEX ON daily_sales (item_counts.itemno)
}
CREATE INDEX ON daily_sales (item_counts.num_sold)
...

4.3

Anti-Pattern 3: Arrays as Fields

The third anti-pattern is shown in Figure 12. This is a cousin of antipattern 2, but for arrays. In this example, the goal is to track, for each
store on each day, the number of each product that was sold there
on that day. In Figure 12(a) the designer has used the products’ ids
(𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑛𝑜) as field names and their associated counts as field values.
As indicated in the figure, this design is query-unfriendly; it is
awkward to search for sales records based on combinations of their
product ids and associated counts. As shown, such a query is messy
to formulate against the anti-pattern. Other queries could be even
worse, like a range query to identify the stores and days where
more than 100 units of any product were sold and then return the
ids of such products. Another problem with this anti-pattern is that
it can cause objects to have many, and highly variant, sets of fields.
(This could be especially problematic when columnar JSON storage
formats are in use internally).
The cure for anti-pattern 3, as shown in Figure 12(b), is to avoid
confusing data with schemas and/or confusing fields with arrays.

Figure 12: Don’t Confuse Fields with Arrays.

result of following the guidelines will be as shown in Figure 3,
where customers and orders are stored separately and each order
is linked back to its associated customer.

4813

(a) ... { "itemno": 347,

(a)

... { "itemno": 185,
"category": ["black ", "silver"],
"name": "Stapler",
"listprice": 21.99 },
{ "itemno": 347,
"name": "Beer Cooler Backpack",
"colors": ["black"],
"listprice": "29.95" },
{ "itemno": 375,
"name": "Stratuscaster Guitar",
"colors": ["sunburst", "black", "cherry"],
"listprice": {"price": 227436.62, "currency": "Yen"} }, ...

(b)

... { "itemno": 185,
"category": ["black ", "silver"],
"name": "Stapler",
"listprice": {"price": 21.99, "currency": =USD"} },
{ "itemno": 347,
"name": "Beer Cooler Backpack",
"colors": ["black"],
"listprice": {"price": 29.95, "currency": =USD"} },
{ "itemno": 375,
"name": "Stratuscaster Guitar",
"colors": ["sunburst", "black", "cherry"],
"listprice": {"price": 227436.62, "currency": "Yen"} }, ...

"name": "Beer Cooler Backpack",
"colors": "black",
"listprice": 29.95 },
{ "itemno": 375,
"name": "Stratuscaster Guitar",
"colors": ["sunburst", "black", "cherry"],
"listprice": 1499.99 }, ...

vs.
(b) ... { "itemno": 347,
"name": "Beer Cooler Backpack",
"colors": ["black"],
"listprice": 29.95 },
{ "itemno": 375,
"name": "Stratuscaster Guitar",
"colors": ["sunburst", "black", "cherry"],
"listprice": 1499.99 }, ...

vs.

Figure 13: Avoid Array Heterogeneity.

Again, the original design is problematic for querying and would
make effective indexing impossible.

4.4

Figure 14: Avoid Scalar Heterogeneity.

Anti-Pattern 4: Non-Uniform Nesting

type for the price to support meaningful comparisons8 , as shown
in Figure 14(b). Another specific variant that we have seen of this
anti-pattern in the wild involves using different date formats (e.g.,
Unix timestamp, date string, datetime string) either across or within
the fields of objects in a given collection.

The fourth anti-pattern, shown in Figure 13(a), might best be described as non-uniform nesting. In the example, some products are
available in a set of colors, while others have only one color option. Here a JSON document designer has chosen to exploit JSON’s
schema flexibility – specifically, its willingness to support heterogeneous field types and values. If there is only one color choice,
𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 is a string, while its value is an array of strings if the product
has multiple color options. This is again a query-unfriendly design
(though not as unfriendly as the previous examples), as queries
may need to test the field’s type (string versus array) when they are
searching for products that are available in a particular color. Indexing such non-uniform data may also turn out to be problematic
in some systems.
The cure for this anti-pattern is to uniformly model a potentially
multivalued field as an array, as shown in Figure 13(b), even if the
array will have just one entry in some of the records. (It is worth
mentioning that JSON of this kind sometimes originates from data
conversion tools, such as tools that convert XML data into JSON.)

4.5

4.6

Anti-Pattern 6: A Mix of Anti-Patterns

The sixth anti-pattern, shown in Figure 15, shows how a given design can suffer from multiple query-related challenges. Here we see
an example where the desire is to store some additional information
about customers, in this case adding a field containing information about their dependents (perhaps for insurance or marketing
use). In Figure 15(a) the information about a customer’s spouse is
stored separately, as a nested object-valued field, with the information about children being stored as a nested array of objects.
This design suffers from non-uniformity, making it both query- and
index-unfriendly if the application needs to ask dependents-related
questions such as the example shown in the figure.
The cure for this anti-pattern, as shown in Figure 15(b), is to
adopt a more uniform approach to modeling the desired information.
In the cure, all dependents are now modeled as objects in an array
of dependents, which is fine despite the fact that more information
(𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑒𝑠) is being maintained for the dependents that are children.
(It is interesting to note that the design shown in this anti-pattern
is a document schema that came from someone with a Ph.D. from
a top 5 school and decades of SQL experience.)

Anti-Pattern 5: Scalar Heterogeneity

The fifth anti-pattern, which is shown in Figure 14(a), is having a
non-uniform representation of a scalar-valued field. Here, the illustrated use case involves dealing with monetary values expressed
in different currencies. If no currency is specified here, the presumption is US dollars, and the records have a mix of string and
numeric values for the price. If the currency is different, then an
object representation is used. JSON is fine with such heterogeneity,
of course, due to its flexibility, but exploiting that flexibility in this
way makes both querying and indexing messier, requiring both to
deal with the defaults as well as the more general case.
Not unlike the cure for the previous anti-pattern, the recommended cure for this anti-pattern would be to always model such a
potentially variant field’s value as an object and to use a numeric

4.7

Anti-Pattern 7: Failure to Embrace Diversity

The poet Maya Angelou said: "We all should know that diversity
makes for a rich tapestry, and we must understand that all the
threads of the tapestry are equal in value no matter what their
8 It would also likely be desirable to use a user-defined function in queries to convert

such prices into some chosen common currency, presumably based on the current
exchange rate at query time.

4814

(a) ...
{

SELECT DISTINCT

...

they appear. In particular, the query excludes personal information while retrieving any/all other fields that the retrieved object
happens to have at the time. (The particular syntax shown is for
SQL++, but MongoDB’s MQL APIs offer a similar exclusionary option.) Assuming that the application renders customer objects based
on inspecting the returned content, the customer service web page
will now show customer service agents the customer’s nickname
as well. In contrast, adding a new field in a relational version of the
application would require updating the customer table’s schema
(via ALTER TABLE) and probably updating the calling web page’s
query code as well, making the application far less fluid in nature.

(b) {

"custid": "C13",
innerQ.custid,
"name": "T. Cody",
innerQ.name
"address": {
FROM (
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
SELECT c.custid, c.name
"zipcode": "63101"
FROM customers c,
},
c.dependents d,
"rating": 750,
"dependents": [
d.spouse
{ "spouse":
WHERE spouse.age > 21
{ "name": "Mary",
UNION
ALL
"age": 42 }
},
SELECT c.custid, c.name
{ "children": [
FROM customers c,
{"name": "Sue",
c.dependents d,
"age": 23,
"activities": ["soccer", "music"]
d.children ch
},
WHERE ch.age > 21
{ "name": "Todd",
) AS innerQ
"age": 17,
"activities": ["reading"]
}
]
SELECT DISTINCT c.custid, c.name
}
FROM customers c, c.dependents d
]
} ...
WHERE d.age >= 21

"custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101"
},
"rating": 750,
"dependents": [
{ "kind": "spouse",
"name": "Mary",
"age": 42
},
{"kind": "child",
"name": "Sue",
"age": 23,
"activities": ["soccer", "music"]
},
{"kind": "child",
"name": "Todd",
"age": 17,
"activities": ["reading"]
}
]
} ...

5

Relational database design is a well-understood process today, and
it is almost always approached in a data-first manner owing to the
data independence provided by the relational model. In contrast,
the art of database design for NoSQL databases, including document
databases, is in a much less mature state at present. NoSQL database
design is often approached in an ad hoc manner that mixes logical
and physical considerations in ways that are all too reminiscent of
the pre-relational database era.
In this paper, we have made the case for a return to sanity by
presenting a logical, data-first, conceptually driven approach to document database design. We have explained how such an approach
can start from an ER model and achieve a clean, query-friendly document database design even though it is not necessary to declare
the resulting schema to the DBMS. We have also highlighted a set
of document (JSON) anti-patterns that should be avoided in order
to facilitate document queries and enable performance tuning via
secondary indexing.
Both our design methodology and anti-patterns stem from the
authors’ experiences, in current and past lives, with a wide variety
of JSON document data in commercial applications, government
applications, and university research applications. We have found
the proposed approach to be effective given the state of today’s
document database systems, as a number of these systems are now
sufficiently rich in their query processing and indexing capabilities
to be able to support data independence in the JSON data world.
Our hope is that others will find these lessons and the resulting
do’s and don’ts helpful in their work as well.

CREATE INDEX ON customers (dependents.age)

Figure 15: A Mix of Design Problems.
(a)

(b)

{ "custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101" },
"rating": 750,
"gender": "male",
"pronouns": ["they", "them"],
}, ...
SELECT c.* EXCLUDE gender
FROM customers c
WHERE c.id = "C13"

{ "custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101" },
"rating": 750,
"gender": "male",
"pronouns": ["they", "them"],
"nickname": "Tim",
}, ...

CONCLUSION

{ "custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101" },
"rating": 750,
"pronouns": ["they", "them"],
}, ...

{ "custid": "C13",
"name": "T. Cody",
"address": {
"street": "201 Main St.",
"city": "St. Louis, MO",
"zipcode": "63101" },
"rating": 750,
"pronouns": ["they", "them"], "],
"nickname": "Tim",
}, ...

Figure 16: Benefiting from Diversity.

color." Having covered a series of anti-patterns that suffer partly
from non-uniformity issues, our final don’t is actually a do stated
in double negative form: Don’t not reap the benefits of diversity! It
may seem, based on our ER-based data-first design methodology
and on our recommendations about steering clear of various forms
of heterogeneity, that we are arguing to move the document database world back five decades to a more rigid (albeit nested) world.
That is not the case. A major benefit of document (JSON) database
systems is their ability to accommodate the kinds of diversity that
modern applications need in order to manage and fluidly evolve
their underlying data.
Figure 16 shows an example of how document databases and
their query facilities can be exploited to enable application fluidity.
Figure 16(a) shows an example of customer data that has been extended with a private field, 𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟 , which should be hidden when a
customer service web page retrieves a customer’s data. As the application evolves, new fields may be added, as shown in Figure 16(b),
where a 𝑛𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑒 field is now also being maintained. The query in
the middle of the figure shows how an application can be prepared
for the addition of new fields without having to be changed when

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF award CNS-1925610, an
industrial gift from Google, and funding from the Donald Bren
Foundation (via a Bren Chair at UC Irvine).

REFERENCES
[1] Amazon Web Services 2024. Amazon DynamoDB. Amazon Web Services. Retrieved November 26, 2024 from https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/
[2] Couchbase, Inc. 2025. About Capella Columnar. Couchbase, Inc. Retrieved
February 2, 2025 from https://docs.couchbase.com/columnar/intro/intro.html
[3] Apache Software Foundation 2025. Apache AsterixDB. Apache Software Foundation. Retrieved January 25, 2025 from https://asterixdb.apache.org/index.html
[4] MongoDB, Inc. 2025. Building With Patterns: A Summary. MongoDB, Inc.
Retrieved February 9, 2025 from https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/buildingwith-patterns-a-summary
[5] Apache Software Foundation 2025. Cassandra Basics. Apache Software Foundation. Retrieved January 25, 2025 from https://cassandra.apache.org/_/cassandrabasics.html

4815

[20] Rick Cattell. 2011. Scalable SQL and NoSQL Data Stores. SIGMOD Rec. 39, 4
(May 2011), 12–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978915.1978919
[21] Don Chamberlin. 2018. SQL++ For SQL Users: A Tutorial. Couchbase, Inc. https:
//www.couchbase.com/content/analytics/sql-book
[22] Donald Chamberlin. 2024. 50 Years of Queries. Commun. ACM 67, 8 (Aug. 2024),
110–121. https://doi.org/10.1145/3649887
[23] Peter Pin-Shan Chen. 1976. The Entity-Relationship Model—toward a Unified
View of Data. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 1, 1 (mar 1976), 9–36. https://doi.org/
10.1145/320434.320440
[24] Amol Deshpande. 2024. Beyond Relations: A Case for Elevating to the EntityRelationship Abstraction [Unpublished Manuscript]. (2024).
[25] Firebase Documentation. 2025. Structure Your Database. Google, Inc. Retrieved
February 9, 2025 from https://firebase.google.com/docs/database/web/structuredata
[26] Murtadha Al Hubail, Ali Alsuliman, Michael Blow, Michael Carey, Dmitry Lychagin, Ian Maxon, and Till Westmann. 2019. Couchbase Analytics: NoETL for
Scalable NoSQL Data Analysis. Proc. VLDB Endow. 12, 12 (aug 2019), 2275–2286.
https://doi.org/10.14778/3352063.3352143
[27] Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu and Li-Yan Yuan. 1987. A New Normal Form for Nested
Relations. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 12, 1 (mar 1987), 111–136. https://doi.org/
10.1145/12047.13676
[28] Raghu Ramakrishnan and Johannes Gehrke. 2002. Database Management Systems
(3 ed.). McGraw-Hill, Inc., USA.
[29] Mark A. Roth and Henry F. Korth. 1987. The Design of ¬ 1NF Relational Databases
into Nested Normal Form. SIGMOD Rec. 16, 3 (dec 1987), 143–159. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/38714.38733
[30] Mark A. Roth, Herry F. Korth, and Abraham Silberschatz. 1988. Extended Algebra
and Calculus for Nested Relational Databases. ACM Trans. Database Syst. 13, 4
(oct 1988), 389–417. https://doi.org/10.1145/49346.49347
[31] Pramod Sadalage and Martin Fowler. 2012. NoSQL Distilled: A Brief Guide to the
Emerging World of Polyglot Persistnce. Addison-Wesley, USA.
[32] H.J. Schek and M.H. Scholl. 1986. The Relational Model with Relation-Valued
Attributes. Inf. Syst. 11, 2 (apr 1986), 137–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/03064379(86)90003-7
[33] Avi Silberschatz, Henry F. Korth, and S. Sudarshan. 2020. Database System
Concepts, Seventh Edition. McGraw-Hill Book Company. https://www.dbbook.com/
[34] Michael Stonebraker and Andrew Pavlo. 2024. What Goes Around Comes
Around... And Around... SIGMOD Rec. 53, 2 (July 2024), 21–37. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3685980.3685984
[35] Wikipedia contributors. 2025. Database design — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Database_design&oldid=
1269437778 [Online; accessed 24-January-2025].

[6] Apache Software Foundation 2025. Cassandra Data Modeling (Introduction).
Apache Software Foundation. Retrieved January 30, 2025 from https://cassandra.
apache.org/doc/stable/cassandra/data_modeling/intro.html
[7] Couchbase, Inc. 2025. Couchbase Server. Couchbase, Inc. Retrieved January 25,
2025 from https://www.couchbase.com/products/server/
[8] MongoDB, Inc. 2025. Data Modeling. MongoDB, Inc. Retrieved February 1, 2025
from https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/data-modeling/
[9] MongoDB, Inc. 2025. Data Modeling. MongoDB, Inc. Retrieved February 9, 2025
from https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/data-modeling/
[10] 2025. Introducing JSON. Retrieved January 25, 2025 from https://www.json.org/
json-en.html
[11] MongoDB, Inc. 2025. Introduction to MongoDB. MongoDB, Inc. Retrieved
January 25, 2025 from https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/
#introduction-to-mongodb
[12] Microsoft, Inc. 2025. Modeling Data in Azure Cosmos DB. Microsoft, Inc. Retrieved
February 1, 2025 from https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cosmos-db/nosql/
modeling-data
[13] MongoDB, Inc. 2025. MongoDB Evolved – Version History. MongoDB, Inc. Retrieved February 1, 2025 from https://www.mongodb.com/resources/products/
mongodb-version-history
[14] Microsoft, Inc. 2025. Queries in Azure Cosmos DB for NoSQL. Microsoft, Inc. Retrieved January 25, 2025 from https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cosmosdb/nosql/query/
[15] Wail Y. Alkowaileet and Michael J. Carey. 2022. Columnar Formats for Schemaless
LSM-based Document Stores. Proc. VLDB Endow. 15, 10 (2022), 2085–2097. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3547305.3547314
[16] Paolo Atzeni, Francesca Bugiotti, Luca Cabibbo, and Riccardo Torlone. 2020.
Data Modeling in the NoSQL World. Computer Standards & Interfaces 67 (2020),
103149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csi.2016.10.003
[17] Dipti Borkar, Ravi Mayuram, Gerald Sangudi, and Michael Carey. 2016. Have
Your Data and Query It Too: From Key-Value Caching to Big Data Management.
In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data (San
Francisco, California, USA) (SIGMOD ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 239–251. https://doi.org/10.1145/2882903.2904443
[18] Michael Carey, Don Chamberlin, Almann Goo, Kian Win Ong, Yannis Papakonstantinou, Chris Suver, Sitaram Vemulapalli, and Till Westmann. 2024. SQL++:
We Can Finally Relax!. In 2024 IEEE 40th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). 5501–5510. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE60146.2024.00438
[19] M. J. Carey. 2019. AsterixDB Mid-Flight: A Case Study in Building Systems in
Academia. In 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICDE.2019.00008

4816
