GaussDB-Vector: A Large-Scale Persistent Real-Time Vector
Database for LLM Applications
Ji Sun

Guoliang Li

James Pan

Tsinghua University
sunji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Tsinghua University
liguoliang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Tsinghua University
jamesjpan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiang Wang

Yongqing Xie

Ruicheng Liu

Huawei
wangjiang16@huawei.com

Huawei
xieyongqing1@huawei.com

Huawei
liuruicheng1@huawei.com

Wen Nie
Huawei
niewen2@huawei.com

ABSTRACT

these challenges, a popular approach is to use a vector database to
serve as "long-term memory". For example, retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) [26] can reduce hallucinations by using a vector database populated with knowledge embeddings to make LLM
answers more controllable and explainable. To reduce inference
cost, semantic memory [12, 16] caches various stages of inference
in embedding form inside a vector database to be retrieved later
for future queries without invoking the LLM. To support these use
cases, the vector database must eciently store and search up to
billions of embeddings while supporting features like frequent updates, high user concurrency, distributed search, high availability,
user isolation, and hybrid scalar-vector ltered search.
This need for a high-performance feature-rich vector database
has led to a number of commercial vector database systems, such
as Milvus [35], PGVector[6] and ElasticSearch[2]. Milvus is designed for large-scale web applications. Data is organized inside
segments of an LSM tree [30], and a search index is built for each
segment. Milvus can persist segments onto the le system and load
them into memory during search. However, Milvus suers from
(1) high query latency as it must search every segment and then
merge the results; (2) expensive updates due to index rebuild when
merging and splitting segments; (3) slow attribute ltering because
it only supports pre-ltering (rst predicates then vectors); (4) low
data freshness as new data is not inserted into indexes immediately.
On the other hand, ElasticSearch is designed for text searching,
and it integrates vector search ability to support semantic search.
Similar to Milvus, ElasticSearch also caches inserted data into
in-memory segments, storing data onto disk when the size of a
segment exceeds a threshold. Data on disk is also organized into
segments, leading to similar drawbacks. PGVector is a vector extension built on PostgreSQL. Similar vector engines include AlloyDB
(Google) and PASE [37] (Alibaba). PGVector supports IVFFLAT[3]
and HNSW [28], and it works by building index structures over data
pages in PostgreSQL. However, it also has drawbacks: (1) HNSW
consumes more I/Os for search on disk-based systems, and its performance is worse than algorithms like NSG [21] and DiskANN [32];
(2) only single-machine search is supported, making it unable to
scale to datasets with billions of vectors.
To address these limitations, we propose a persistent real-time
vector database system GaussDB-Vector for LLM applications,

Vector databases are widely used as a fundamental tool for addressing the weaknesses of large language model (LLM) applications,
specically hallucinations and the high cost of inference. However,
existing vector databases either cater to niche applications with lowlatency in-memory search, or oer sophisticated data management
capabilities but at the cost of low performance.
To address these limitations, we propose GaussDB-Vector, a
high-performance, real-time persistent vector database that excels
in low-latency scalable search, real-time inserts and deletes, high
availability, large-scale distributed search, and hybrid scalar-vector
ltered search capabilities. These features are primarily achieved
through an innovative storage architecture designed for a graphbased vector index, optimized for I/O operations and adaptable
across various dataset sizes and dimensions, complemented by
novel buering strategies to further reduce I/O burdens. GaussDBVector supports product quantization, parallel search, and hardware acceleration via SIMD, GPUs, and NPUs in order to further accelerate queries. Experimental results show that GaussDB-Vector
outperforms competitive baselines by a factor of 1 to 5 times.
PVLDB Reference Format:
Ji Sun, Guoliang Li, James Pan, Jiang Wang, Yongqing Xie, Ruicheng Liu,
and Wen Nie. GaussDB-Vector: A Large-Scale Persistent Real-Time Vector
Database for LLM Applications. PVLDB, 18(12): 4951 - 4963, 2025.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750619

1

INTRODUCTION

Large language models (LLM) are the foundation for modern AI
applications. For example, intelligent Q&A systems such as ChatGPT use LLMs to generate answers according to user prompts, and
intelligent agents use LLMs to generate actions that can be taken
to accomplish certain tasks. But LLM-based tools face two main
challenges, hallucinations and expensive inference cost. To address
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
License. Visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ to view a copy of
this license. For any use beyond those covered by this license, obtain permission by
emailing info@vldb.org. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights
licensed to the VLDB Endowment.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, Vol. 18, No. 12 ISSN 2150-8097.
doi:10.14778/3750601.3750619

4951

4952

queries, including hybrid search and nested queries. We integrate
new vector types into SQL and expose vector manipulation commands for ease of use. For example, users can create a table with
both vector and ordinary data by using CREATE TABLE; build a vector index by using CREATE INDEX; and conduct a top-: search using
SELECT· · · ORDER BY· · · LIMIT K. With the help of the SQL engine, GaussDB-Vector is able to apply rewrite rules and cost-based
optimization to accelerate query processing. For example, the optimizer selects sequence scan if the selectivity of a predicate is large;
otherwise index scan is used. On top of the standard SQL interface, GaussDB-Vector also supports SDKs for other programming
languages that can be used to develop database clients.
Storage Management. In order to reduce data fragmentation and
increase the eciency of concurrent I/O, GaussDB-Vector adopts
page-based storage management. Vector data is a special type of
xed length array, and it is stored in a row-based storage format
with other relational columns. GaussDB-Vector supports building
vector indexes to reduce the vector search I/O cost. Each vector
index is a structured le containing vector IDs and their locations
in the data les. The index can be organized as an inverted list
or a graph. In order to reduce the number of random page visits,
GaussDB-Vector clusters closest vectors into physically contiguous
data blocks. Moreover, the logical structures of the vector indexes
are designed to reduce I/O and improve cache locality of hot data.
GaussDB-Vector supports data sharding according to both the
scalar column and the vector column to support high scalability on
large-scale datasets. For graph-based indexes, GaussDB-Vector also
optimizes the edge pruning algorithm to reduce index construction
time. The details of ANN indexing are described in Section 3.
Hardware Acceleration. Vector search queries depend on many
compute-bound operators, including clustering, quantization, similarity computations, etc. GaussDB-Vector optimizes these implementation for machines with Ascend/Kunpeng CPUs. On Kunpeng
CPUs, parallel oat instructions can be carried out using SIMD
capability, where multiple oat numbers are calculated in one instruction cycle. Kunpeng CPUs have more cores than other CPUs
of the same grade, and thus thread parallelism is a vital approach to
reducing latency of vector queries. GaussDB-Vector also supports
parallel vector index construction and search, and selects the degree of parallelism and balances the load automatically. On Ascend
NPUs, GaussDB-Vector supports batching vectors into matrices,
synchronizing data in a unied memory space between the CPU
and NPU to accelerate computations using NPU tensor cores.

<cos>,<euc> and <ham> to denote operators of Cosine distance,
Euclidean distance and Hamming distance respectively.
-- DDL: create a vector table
CREATE TABLE [schema_name.]vectortab
(id int, vec floatvector(128), doc text)
WITH (ORIENTATION={ROW|COL})
[PARTITION BY {
{RANGE (partition_key)} |
{RANGE (partition_key)} |
{LIST|HASH (partition_key)}];
-- create a vector index
CREATE INDEX [CONCURRENTLY][IF NOT EXISTS]
[[schema_name.]vectoridx]
ON table_name [USING {IVF|VAMANA}]
({{column_name {L2|Cosine|IP|Hamming}}
[LOCAL]
[WITH ({storage_parameter=value} [, ...])]
[{VISIBLE|INVISIBLE}]
[WHERE predicate];
-- alter parameters of index
ALTER INDEX vectoridx
SET(storage_parameter=value);
-- rebuild the index
REINDEX [CONCURRENTLY] vectoridx;

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

-- DML: copy vector data from csv file
COPY t1 FROM 'floatvector.csv' CSV HEADER;
-- insert vector into table
INSERT INTO t1 VALUES
(9711839, '[30,12,12,25]');
-- update vector data
UPDATE t1
SET repr = '[30,12,12,25]'
WHERE id = 1;
-- top-k search (Cosine)
SELECT id, repr <cos> '[1,1,3,2]' as s
FROM t1 ORDER BY s LIMIT 2;
-- range search (Cosine)
SELECT id, repr <cos> '[1,1,3,2]' as s
FROM t1 WHERE s < 0.8;
-- delete vector from table
DELETE FROM t1 WHERE id = 1;

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

3
2.2

SQL Interface

VECTOR INDEXING

Vector indexing reorganizes vector data into index les in order to
accelerate ANN search, and it is the core part of a vector database.
Various ANN indexing algorithms have been proposed, and they
can be classied as IVF-based methods [19], hashing-based methods [18], graph-based methods [10, 11, 13, 36] and quantizationbased methods [20, 24, 25]. IVF-based methods and graph-based
methods can shape the index according to the data distribution
and have better accuracy on top-k search, thus GaussDB-Vector
focuses on IVF and Vamana graph [32] as basic algorithms for ANN
indexing. Based on these two algorithms, GaussDB-Vector adopts
product quantization to further accelerate the search, and it also
supports real-time updates.

GaussDB-Vector extends SQL to support vector search. Below, we
present some typical usage examples.
Data Denition Language (DDL). The DDL can be used to dene
vector table schemas and build indexes on vectors and scalars. As
vector index construction can take several hours for trillions of data
items, users can add the CONCURRENTLY keyword to avoid blocking
other business applications, which builds the index using a data
snapshot and then incrementally updates it based on the delta data.
Data Manipulation Language (DML). The DML can be used
for querying and manipulating vector data. Users can orchestrate
dierent operations using standard SQL. For simplicity, we use

4953

Index Construction. During index construction, GaussDB-Vector
rst collects a set of vectors from heap table into memory by using reservoir sampling and then conducts :-means clustering on
the samples, constructing cluster pages according to the results.
GaussDB-Vector then scans all the vectors in the table and labels
each vector with the ID of its nearest cluster (centroid), then sorts
all the vectors by label. Next GaussDB-Vector builds data pages for
each cluster according to the sorted vectors while also updating the
information in the cluster pages. Building data pages in sorted order
results in clusters that are stored contiguously, allowing search to
be optimized by batch processing and data prefetching.
Vector Top-: Search. When a top-: query comes, the query vector is rst compared against the centroids in the rst-layer cluster
pages to nd # nearest clusters, along with " nearest sub-clusters
from each cluster. In our evaluation, we observed that setting # ×"
to cover 5–10% of the dataset proves eective in achieving
√ high
recall with minimal latency. Therefore, we set N and M as 10% of
total number of rst/second layer buckets respectively by default (at
least 1). Then, GaussDB-Vector scans the candidate vector set, Vę ,
ÍĊ
"ğ sub-clusters, and computes
consisting of vectors from the ğ=1
distances to each candidate vector. Next, GaussDB-Vector conducts
binary sort on these vectors according to distance to the query. The
binary sort iteratively picks a vector with distance X and removes
vectors from Vę with distances greater than X, stopping once |Vę |
is less than 2: GaussDB-Vector then fetches the corresponding
rows from the table in the order of distances for vectors in Vę and
checks their visibility. If a row is not visible (based on transactions),
GaussDB-Vector scans the next row. If there are not enough visible
rows, GaussDB-Vector sorts and scans the next partition of candidate vectors (resulting from the binary sort). In this way, the sorting
complexity should be O (|Vę | + 21 |Vę | + 41 |Vę | + 18 |Vę | +· · ·+ 21Ĥ |Vę |),
which is O (2|Vę |) when = is innite, and the total top-: fetching
complexity is O (2|Vę | +: + #ğĤĬğĩğĘĢě ), where #ğĤĬğĩğĘĢě is the number of rows being lazy deleted. Since the term |Vę | often dominates
over other two terms, we simplify it as $ (|Vę |). The full sorting
complexity is $ (|Vę |;>6(|Vę |)) for any query. This mechanism allows GaussDB-Vector to handle invalid entries appearing in the
candidate set due to situations such as asynchronous deletion and
multi-attribute ltering.
Vector Insert. For an insert query, GaussDB-Vector compares
distances between centroids of clusters to nd the nearest cluster.
It then obtains the insert block ID that points to the last data page
corresponding to the nearest cluster from the cluster page and
appends the context ID (ctid) of the query vector to this page. The
ctid gives the location of the vector in the heap table. If the last
page is full, GaussDB-Vector tries to insert the vector into the next
page and then updates the insert block ID upon success. But if the
last page is full and it is also the last valid page, GaussDB-Vector
requests a sequence of recycled pages from the free space manager
(FSM) or creates new pages from the le system.
Vector Delete. For vector delete, GaussDB-Vector rst identies
the target row based on the query, then locates the cluster containing the corresponding vector by nding the cluster with centroid
nearest to the vector. The vector is then marked for deletion by
setting a deletion ag. In order to achieve low latency, physical
removal is conducted during asynchronous batch cleanup.

IVF ANN Index
MetaPage

1st Layer Cluster Page

nclus

nclus2

is_pq

centroids

2nd_start

is_compress

Ntuple

NIdx

centroids

2nd_start

2nd Layer Cluster Page

2nd Layer Cluster Page

centroids

data_start

data_insert

centroids

data_start

data_insert

centroids

data_start

data_insert

centroids

data_start

data_insert

Code1

PQ Table

Code2

dis_11

dis_12

dis_13

dis_14

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

dis_21

dis_22

dis_23

dis_24

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Clustering Data Page

Clustering Data Page

Clustering Data Page

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Vec/pq

Ctid

Figure 2: Structure of IVF Index

3.1

IVF-based Index

An IVF-based index splits the high-dimensional vector space by
clustering, and then locates the data from clusters with nearest centroids. IVF-based indexes are popular for their small data expansion
and sequential data access characteristics. IVF-based indexes are especially suitable for data sizes in the millions, and they are fast and
easy to maintain. In this section, we describe the implementation
details for the IVF-based index in GaussDB-Vector.
Index Structure. GaussDB-Vector uses two-layer clustering for
the IVF index in order to balance the load of clusters. As Figure 2
shows, the index is composed of a sequence of linked pages, organized logically as a three-layer tree structure. The metapage is
the rst page in the index le, and it stores the conguration and
statistics of the index, including the number of clusters in the upper
two layers, number of vectors, whether the index is compressed,
and whether the index uses product quantization. Following this
page are the rst-layer clustering pages, containing centroids and
start positions of secondary-layer clusters. Each secondary-layer
cluster page contains the centroid and start point of full data in this
sub-cluster.
In order to accelerate distance computing and reduce the space
overhead, ANN search engines can take advantage of product quantization (PQ) techniques. PQ splits each of the vectors into segments,
and each segment is represented by the closest centroid. If the index
uses PQ, then GaussDB-Vector will build a PQ table structure according to the distribution of data and store it before the data pages.
The data pages then store PQ codes instead of full vectors in order
to reduce storage and distance computing cost. When the query
computes the distance of two vectors, it nds the centroids and
computes sum of distances between centroids. GaussDB-Vector
adopts PQ-ADC [24] to increase the precision of product quantization, PQ-ADC only quantizes the data in the index, and the query
vector remains unchanged. On the other hand if PQ is not used,
data pages directly follow the cluster pages, and all the indexed
data is stored in the data pages. Each tuple in a data page contains
vector data and the corresponding tuple ID in the heap table. The
vector is used to select nearest neighbors by distance, and the tuple
ID is used to locate the row tuple in the original table.

4954

Graph ANN Index
MetaPage
Dim

EnablePQ

Format

PQTable Page
StartPoint

locks

nseg

pqcode_size

nclus

pqtable_start_blkid

pqtable_end_blkid

NodeSize

centroids[nseg][Dim/nseg][nclus]

pqcode_end_blkid

pqcode_start_blkid

EdgeSize

distance_table[nseg][nclus][nclus]

(1565>dim>130)

dim<=130)
Data Page
vector

ctid

idxtid1

dist1

idxtidD

distD

É

Data Page
PQ0

vector

ctid

sqrs1

PQ1

idxtid1

dist1

sqrsD

PQD

idxtidD

distD

(dim>=1565,EnablePQ)
Data Page
ctid
dist1

idxtidD

distD

É

sqrs1

PQ1

sqrsD

PQD

PQ1

sqrs1

PQtid1

PQ2

sqrsD

PQtidD

PQD

É

(dim>=1565,DisablePQ)
Node Page

PQ0

idxtid1

É

PQ
PQtid0

Edge Page

vector1

ctid1

idxtid1

dist1

É

sqrs1

vector2

ctid2

idxtidD

distD

sqrsD

idxtid1

dist1

É

sqrs1

idxtidD

distD

sqrsD

É
vectorN

ctidN

Figure 3: Structure of Graph-Based Index
Vector Vacuum. GaussDB-Vector relies on a vacuum operation
to do space vacuum and batch cleanup of index les and tables. The
vacuum operation is executed automatically when the number of
tuples marked for deletion exceeds 10% of the table. For the IVFbased index, the vacuum operation scans all clusters one by one.
For each cluster, GaussDB-Vector acquires new pages from FSM
or le system, adds a shared lock on the data pages in this cluster,
and then copies the undeleted vectors in this cluster to the new
pages sequentially. Then, GaussDB-Vector adds an exclusive lock
on the secondary cluster page and updates the start/insert block
ID. Once all vectors have been copied, GaussDB-Vector releases
all the locks and puts the replaced data pages for the cluster into
FSM. This procedure is executed iteratively until all clusters have
been processed. In this way, only update/insert queries on certain
clusters are blocked by vacuum, and only for a short period of time.

3.2

Graph-based Index

Graph-based indexes have the advantage of fast and accurate approximation for dierent data distributions. GaussDB-Vector adopts
Vamana graph [32] as the basic algorithm. Vamana graph is a directed monotonic relative neighborhood graph which guarantees
a search complexity close to logarithmic time, and Vamana graph
restricts the maximal out-degree for each node to ease management
on the disk. Compared to NSG [21], Simhadri et. al. [32] show that
adding a soft coecient to the distance when pruning edges brings
benets to the performance. Aditi et. al. [22] propose methods for
data modication and show that the soft coecient can make the
performance of Vamana graph stable, even after 40% of the data
is deleted. Based on these previous works, GaussDB-Vector judiciously implements the structure of Vamana graph in terms of page
design for reducing I/O cost, lock management for supporting high
concurrency, and buer management for reducing query latency.
GaussDB-Vector proposes a two-phase neighbor pruning method
to further reduce the overhead of vector insert and graph construction. Next we introduce the details of the graph-based index.
Index Structure. GaussDB-Vector builds and stores the graph
structure in the blocks of index les. The rst page in the index les

4955

is the metapage, and it stores metadata about the index including
vector dimension, storage method, object size, start locations of
dierence page types, product quantization congurations, and
locks for the current index. Following the metapage, the PQTable
page stores the centroids of each PQ segment along with distances
of all centroid pairs in each segment. The main components of the
graph-based index are the nodes, edges, and PQ codes.
GaussDB-Vector designs three structures for adapting to dierent scenarios. (1) If the vector dimension is not very large, GaussDBVector stores all data associated with a single vector (i.e. its PQ
code and neighbor codes, etc.) together in one page. When a query
navigates the graph index, it can easily get the PQ code of the current vector as well as all the PQ codes of the neighbors by reading
a single page, thereby reducing overhead of I/O. For example in
Figure 3, the threshold value of 130 dimensions is calculated assuming 96 neighbors, 6-byte tuple IDs, 4-byte oat vector values,
96-byte PQ codes (maximum), and 8*1024 bytes of space per page.
(2) If the dimension of vectors is larger, the neighbor codes are too
large to be put on one page. GaussDB-Vector moves the PQ codes
out to a separate zone to avoid redundancy, and the data page only
stores the tuple IDs of each neighbor. Even so, as the total size of
PQ codes for all the vectors is small compared to the index, they
can easily be cached in memory. Therefore, this structure is still
very ecient even though GaussDB-Vector needs to read multiple
PQ code pages for getting the neighbors. For example in Figure 3,
the threshold value of 1565 dimensions is calculated using the same
assumptions as before. (3) Users can also select a compression mode
for the index structure if the data volume is very large (e.g. 1 billion vectors on one machine) or the dimension is very high (e.g.
2048). In this structure, GaussDB-Vector separates nodes and edges
completely and each of them can be compactly arranged. If PQ is
enabled for a query, the raw vectors can be dropped from the index
to further reduce storage cost.
Index Construction. To quickly build the graph-based index,
GaussDB-Vector clusters the vectors into Nĝ overlapped groups so
that each vector belongs to its two nearest clusters. For each group,
GaussDB-Vector constructs a small graph with only half the maximum out-degrees of the full graph. In this way, the index can be
built in memory to avoid frequent data swaps, and global connectivity can also be maintained as each vector belongs to two subgraphs.
The index construction procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.
Each subgraph is constructed by incrementally inserting vectors
into a randomly initialized graph, as shown in Algorithm 2. In
this way, early inserted nodes can retain some longer edges to
reduce the radius of the graph. The insertion operation relies on
vector search and neighbor pruning to keep the neighbors close and
maximize the edge angle (this feature is proposed by MRNG [21]).
For vector search, Algorithm 4 shows the greedy search procedure.
Given a query vector, a root node is retrieved from the min-heap
representing the closest vector so far to the query, and then the
distances between its unvisited neighbors and the query vector are
computed. Next, these neighbors are inserted into the min-heap.
The min-heap has a limited size so that nodes far away from the
query are gradually evicted. This process continues until there are
no more unvisited nodes. Note that duplicate vectors are linked
into one node, and only the main node participates in neighbor
selection. This greatly improves the quality of the graph because

Algorithm 1: BuildGraphIndex
Input: A column of vector data in table S, number of
segments for PQ (Ħħ , number of clusters in each PQ
segment Ħħ , number of subgraphs #ĝ
Output: A graph-structured index G.
1 G ← initialize an empty graph structure on the disk ;
2 %& ← calculate PQ table on S ;
3 G ← calculate PQ code for each node ;
4 (0<?;4 ← sample from S;
5 4=CA>83B ← cluster (0<?;4 into #ĝ clusters ;
6 for ( 8 ← 0; 8 < #ĝ ; 8 ← 8 + 1 )
7
GĩīĘ ← ∅;
8
foreach ( E ∈ S )
9
83B ← calculate the nearest two centroid ids ;
10
if 8 ∈ 83B then
11
GĩīĘ ← GĩīĘ ∪ {E } ;
12
GĩīĘ ← Call BuildSubgraph() to build the Vamana
graph with 48 out-degree on vectors in GĩīĘ ;
13
G ← G ∪ GĩīĘ ² Merge the in-memory subgraph into
on-disk index with 96 out-degree for each node ;
14 return G ;

Algorithm 3: VectorInsert
Input: An in-memory graph G, a query vector E.
Output: An in-memory graph with query vector G.
1 ?>>; ← get candidates list by searching query E from G ;
2 U ← 1.2 ;
3 N (E) ← ∅ ;
4 D ← {38BC0=24 (:, E)|: ∈ ?>>; } ;
′
′
′
′
5 for ( U ← 1.0; U f U ' |N (E)| < 346A44; U ← U ∗ 1.2 )
6
foreach ( : ∈ ($') (?>>;, 0B24=38=6) )
7
3ġġ ′ ← "8=(38BC0=24 (:, : ′ )|: ′ ∈ N (E)) ;
8
if ġĬ f 3ġġ ′ ∗ U ′ then
9
N (E) ← N (E) ∪ {: } ² As k is closer to v than to
any existing neighbor of v, v connects to k ;
10 G ← set neighbors N (E) ;
11 foreach ( ? ∈ N (E) )
12
foreach ( ? ′ ∈ ($') (N (?), 34B24=38=6) )
13
if ĦĦ ′ f ĦĬ then
14
break;
15
if 38BC0=24 (E, ? ′ ) < ĦĦ ′ ∗ U then
16
N (?) ← N (?) − ? ′ + E
² As p’ is closer to v
than to p, p connects to v instead ;
17
G ← set neighbors N (?) ;
18
break;
19 return G ;

Algorithm 2: BuildSubgraph
Input: A column of vector data in this subgraph S.
Output: An in-memory Vamana graph G.
1 G ← initialize an in-memory regular graph ;
2 parallelly foreach( E ∈ S )
3
G ← insert E in G ;
4 return G ;

Algorithm 4: VectorSearch
Input: In-memory graph G, query E, candidate size "ĝĨėĦℎ .
Output: A set of vectors C visited when searching.
1 C ← ∅ ;
2 H ← a min-heap with size "ĝĨėĦℎ with the xed start
point in the graph G ;
3 ? ← pop a node from H ;
4 C ← C ∪ {?} ;
5 while ? is valid do
6
N (?) ← unvisited neighbors of p ;
7
foreach ( ? ′ ∈ N (?) )
8
H ← insert ? ′ and its distance to ? ;
9
? ← pop a node from H ;
10
C ← C ∪ {?} ;
11 return C ;

having too many duplicate neighbors can create cliques, leading to
local minima traps that result in low recall during searches.
The total cost consists of subgraph construction, which for each
subgraph is proportional to |( |/|#ĝ | times the insertion complexity,
along with the overhead of the partitioning phase (Algorithm 1
lines 2–5). For this phase in particular, the exact cost depends on
the number of PQ segments and clusters in each segment, but in
general is linear with respect to |( |.
Vector Top-k Search. ANN search on the graph-based index follows the procedure in Algorithm 4, returning results from the candidate set. However, as the index is stored on disk, the search query
needs several random I/Os to get the candidates and their neighbors. As the size of the shared buer is limited, only the data that
will be frequently visited is worth caching. Based on this principal,
GaussDB-Vector caches nodes and edges visited in the rst two
steps when searching, along with the PQ table and codes, while
other data is fetched from disk. GaussDB-Vector also optimizes
SSD read speed by fetching neighbors using multiple I/O threads.
Specically, the default value of "ĝĨėĦℎ is 128. If the total number
of data rows is smaller than 128, the candidate set will decrease to
the number of rows automatically. If we cannot get enough results
(:-NN vectors) from candidate set due to invisible or ltered rows,

GaussDB-Vector will double the candidate size "ĝĨėĦℎ and search
more candidates starting from the existing candidates.
Vector Insert. Given a vector to insert, the candidate set is obtained
by searching the graph for the nearest neighbors, and then selecting
some of the nodes in the candidate set to keep as the neighbors of
the vector, as shown in Algorithm 3. The aim of neighbor selection
is to nd the nodes whose distance to the vector is smaller than the
distances to the other kept neighbors of the vector. Vamana [32]
introduces a relaxation coecient to keep more connections, and
this can enhance the overall connectivity of the graph. Additionally,
in order to make the vector reachable by existing nodes, GaussDBVector tries to add the vector as a neighbor of each of its neighbors.

4956

4957

4.1

DN1

k=18

DN1
0.4

DN2

0.5

DN2

k=10
0.8

0.9

DN4

DN3

k=18

Query
k=3

DN4

DN3
k=10,18
Data Sharding: Adaptive sharding for dynamic data distribution
Interted
Deleted

DN1

DN1
DN2

Move from DN2 to
DN1 to repair the
data sharding

DN2

Hybrid Search

In the hybrid index, all the root and middle nodes have vector
subindexes. When a query searches a node where the scalar predicate selects more than 50% of the data, the query can search for
the answer from the vector subindex directly. Thus the query does
not have to scan all the leaf data and individually rank the vectors.
However, the leaf nodes themselves do not have vector subindexes.
This is because a leaf node will not contain many tuples (less than
100 in general), and sequence scan is fast enough for small amount
of data. Therefore, queries with small selectivities can quickly locate the scalar data and get the answer by sorting a small number
of vectors, and queries with high selectivities can search the answer
from a vector subindex with the minimal super-set of selected data.

4.3

k=3,10,18

Query

The scalar values are organized as a balanced tree structure that
can be searched in O (;>6(=)) time. Just like a b-tree in a relational
database, each node in the hybrid index occupies one page, and
it also supports data updates by using INSERT, SPLIT, and ROTATE
operations. In each root and middle node, a pointer linking the
metapage of a vector subindex is arranged at the beginning, and
a series of scalar division values and pointers linking to the next
level are staggered and tightly arranged. In each leaf node, all the
scalar values are tightly arranged, and each of the scalar values is
linked to a vector and ctid in the heap table.

4.2

Query Schedule: Send query to the closest DNs

Data Sharding: Insert query into one DN

Hybrid Index Structure

DN4

DN3

DN4

DN3

Figure 5: Data is inserted into the nearest node, and query
will be sent to multiple near nodes.
In summary, the design of the hybrid index involves a tradeo
between search performance and update eciency. Having more
vector indexes on a greater number of scalar index nodes improves
search performance but reduces update eciency. GaussDB-Vector
achieves a balance between search and updates by selectively building dierent types of vector indexes based on the node type and
the volume of data associated with each node.

Hybrid Data Update

5

An update query may involve insert, delete or both. Data delete is
cheap because the deleted vector only needs to be marked as dead
instead of removing it immediately. But data insert may trigger node
splitting or rotating if the inserted page is full. Splitting happens
when one node is full and the neighbors are also full. It creates a new
node with half of the values, then inserts a pointer to the new node
into the parent node. Rotating happens when the inserted node is
full but neighbors still have space. For example in the bottom of
Figure 4, the last middle node is full, but the left still has one free
space, and thus 75 is moved down to the middle node and 90 moved
up to the root node so that 95 can be inserted successfully. Rotating
causes update operations in the last middle node and the root node
along with an insert operation in the left middle node.
Node modication dominates the cost of data update in the
hybrid index, especially for nodes with vector subindexes. This is
also one of the reasons why vector subindexes are not built on the
leaf nodes (the leaf node is highly likely to be split frequently). For
the vector subindexes, the splitting and merging cost is higher for
the graph-based index than for the IVF index. For the IVF index, the
distribution of vectors does not change after node splitting/merging
in most cases, and each bucket can be evenly split. But sometimes,
dierent ranges of scalar values correspond to dierent vector
distributions (even if the ranges are close to each other) so that
the IVF index needs to be rebuilt over the new nodes. Likewise for
the graph-based index, deleting half of the data in one subindex
when splitting degrades the quality of the index, and GaussDBVector overcomes this by rebuilding on each of the new nodes. A
graph-based index is only used in the root node or middle nodes
containing more than 10 million vectors so that the construction
cost can be compensated by the search performance gain.

DISTRIBUTED VECTOR SEARCH

The two-tier architecture of GaussDB-Vector enables it to eciently manage and scale large volumes of vectors. It supports
billions of vectors on individual data nodes and can be expanded to
handle trillions of vectors by adding more machines. In this section,
we detail the methods used for distributing vectors and routing
queries across the data nodes.
Data Sharding. In GaussDB-Vector, all the data is distributed by
distance. Vectors are split into 2 clusters, with each cluster corresponding to one of the 2 data nodes. The centroid of each cluster
is stored in a coordinate node. As Figure 5 shows, the distribution
status has 4 types. In the RANDOM phase, the centroids information
is invalid, and inserted vectors are randomly distributed to the data
nodes. After the volume of data reaches a threshold (e.g. 50,000),
GaussDB-Vector starts the FULL REDISTRIBUTING phase. In this
phase, GaussDB-Vector clusters the data and moves the tuples to
the corresponding data nodes. During this phase, clustering blocks
data update queries for a short time, and search queries are still
sent to all data nodes. After the centroids are decided, new vectors
are inserted into the nearest data nodes, and old vectors are moved
in the background. When the status becomes CLUSTERED, search
queries are sent to close clusters, increasing the throughput. Data
updates may cause the distribution to shift, degrading the quality
of the clustering. GaussDB-Vector supports periodic incremental
redistribution. In the background, GaussDB-Vector samples data
from each data node and computes centroids for each data node.
GaussDB-Vector then relabels each vector, and if the ratio of shifted
vectors exceeds a threshold (e.g. 10%), GaussDB-Vector will update
the centroids and start redistribution in the background.
Query Routing. One of the challenges in distributed vector search
is determining how many data nodes each search query should be

4958

Table 1: Datasets

sent to. If too few data nodes are searched, the recall of the ANN
search will be very low. Conversely, if too many data nodes are
involved, the performance will be suboptimal. We can estimate the
cardinality of each data node for search queries [33], and when
users do ANALYZE for distributed tables, GaussDB-Vector trains
a cardinality model for each data node using a small data sample, and the models are stored in the coordinate node. For range
queries, the query vector and distance threshold are used to directly
estimate the cardinalities of each data node, allowing the query
to be sent to only those data nodes with large cardinalities. For
top-: queries, cardinality estimation of each data node is more
complicated. GaussDB-Vector uses binary search on distances to
nd the threshold where the sum of all estimated cardinalities on
data nodes exceeds :, and then queries are sent to those nodes
with high contributions. For hybrid queries with a scalar lter condition, selectivity of the lter condition is considered during the
cardinality estimation. However, cardinality estimation errors are
unavoidable, even with sophisticated models. We nd that error
propagation across various query types showed that query vectors near a cluster centroid (i.e., assigned to a single machine in
our distributed architecture) were least likely to suer accuracy
degradation. In contrast, queries with vectors near inter-cluster
boundaries experienced the most signicant performance decline.
To address this issue, GaussDB-Vector additionally selects clusters
whose centroids’ distance to the query vector is equal to or less than
the maximum distance among currently selected cluster centers.

6

dataset
SIFT
GIST
HUAWEINet
SIFT-H
GIST-H
HUAWEINet-H
SIFT-10B

#rows
10M
1M
15M
10M
1M
10M
10B

#dims
128
960
1024
128
960
1024
128

#cols
1
1
1
2
2
2
1

scalar ndv
/
/
/
1M
500K
1M
/

distance
Euclidean
Euclidean
Cosine
Euclidean
Euclidean
Cosine
Euclidean

7 EXPERIMENTS
7.1 Experimental Settings
In this section, we conduct experiments for testing vector search
performance (see Section 7.2), hybrid search performance (see Section 7.3), scalability on large scale datasets (see Section 7.4) and
acceleration by using heterogeneous hardware (see Section 7.6).
Datasets. We use three basic datasets with representative dimensions (128, 960, and 1,024). SIFT contains a collection of image embeddings generated using the SIFT algorithm [27]. GIST contains
vectors describing the GIST features of images [29]. HUAWEINet is
a collection of embedding vectors for documents in the telecommunication eld provided by Huawei. We extend each dataset by
adding an ID column that is a biased integer column with duplicates
and a large range of distinct values, and we test hybrid search on
these datasets. We extend SIFT to SIFT-10B to test the scalability
of distributed GaussDB-Vector. Table 1 shows the details.
Baselines. We take three well-known and widely-used ANN systems, ElasticSearch, Milvus, and PGVector, as baselines. In order to ensure fairness of comparison, we only test the standalone
versions of these systems. ElasticSearch is a NoSQL ANN system. It supports very comprehensive document and vector similarity retrieval features, stores semi-structured data (like JSON),
and supports near real-time ANN query processing. Milvus is a
storage-compute disaggregated system. It is also a vector-native
ANN system, and all the data is organized as vector index structures. PGVector is an extension of PostgreSQL to support vector
data storage, computing, and searching. Both GaussDB-Vector and
PGVector are relational vector databases and support real-time
ANN query processing. Additionally, we use HNSW indexes for
all baselines, as HNSW performs the best on these datasets among
all indexes supported by these systems. We build a graph-based
index for single vector searching queries, and hybrid index for
multi-column searching queries in GaussDB-Vector. And the default value for size of probing candidate set is 128. The index sizes of
GaussDB-Vector are 9GB for 10M SIFT, 8.6 TB for 10B SIFT-10B,
and 35GB for 10M HUAWEINet. These are comparable to the index
sizes of the baseline systems, Milvus and ElasticSearch.
Hardware Environment. We conduct experiments on clusters
of 40 machines. Each machine is equipped with 72 Intel 3.00GHz
CPU cores, 64GB memory and 2TB of disk, connected by 10 Gigabit
Ethernet. One machine also contains eight Ascend-920B type NPUs.

HARDWARE ACCELERATION

GaussDB-Vector can improve vector search performance by utilizing specialized hardware like NPUs or GPUs, which are capable
of calculating distances for batches of vector pairs. To utilize new
hardware, the distance computation between two sets of vectors
is transformed into basic matrix operations by using the formula
 (G, ~) = G 2 − 2 · (G × ~Đ ) + ~ 2 , where G 2 is a self sum-product of
rows of G that can be precomputed when loading each vector into
an index. Note that a fairly large matrix is needed to fully utilize
the parallelism of NPUs.
Using NPUs/GPUs can signicantly accelerate vector index construction and searching. For the IVF-based index, GaussDB-Vector
uses NPUs to conduct data clustering. It computes distances of
vectors to centroids in the NPU and labels the vectors according to
their closest centroids, and then it sends vectors in the same cluster
to the NPU to rene the centroid. After clustering is completed,
the centroids are xed, and vectors are labeled in batch according to their distances to centroids computed in the NPU. For the
graph-based index, GaussDB-Vector builds a graph-based index by
inserting each vector into a random graph in parallel, as mentioned
in Section 3. For each inserted vector, we nd the candidate set
and select edges for it and its neighbors, and the performance bottleneck is distance computations during edge pruning. Therefore,
we accumulate the inserted vectors, candidate sets closest to the
vectors, and the neighbors of vectors in the candidate sets, and
compute the distances in the NPU. Based on the distance table, we
run the neighbor selection algorithm for each node.
GaussDB-Vector also supports using SIMD, available in mainstream CPUs, to accelerate distance computing for single vector
pairs by folding the vectors into segments.

7.2

Vector Query Performance

Concurrent Execution. We compared query latency, recall, and
throughput across the three datasets with an increased number of
connections. We set the concurrency to 50 to ensure that the number of cores wouldn’t become a bottleneck. Figure 7 and Figure 8

4959

4960

4961

4962

REFERENCES

[23] P. Indyk and R. Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: Towards removing the
curse of dimensionality. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing, STOC ’98, page 604–613, New York, NY, USA, 1998.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[24] H. Jégou, M. Douze, and C. Schmid. Product quantization for nearest neighbor
search. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(1):117–
128, 2011.
[25] Y. Kalantidis and Y. Avrithis. Locally optimized product quantization for approximate nearest neighbor search. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 2329–2336, 2014.
[26] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler,
M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela. Retrieval-augmented
generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’20, Red Hook,
NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc.
[27] D. G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. International Journal of Computer Vision, 60(2), 2004.
[28] Y. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin. Ecient and robust approximate nearest neighbor
search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 42(4):824–836, 2020.
[29] A. Oliva and A. Torralba. Modeling the shape of the scene: A holistic representation of the spatial envelope. International Journal of Computer Vision, 42(3),
2001.
[30] P. O’Neil, E. Cheng, D. Gawlick, and E. O’Neil. The log-structured merge-tree
(LSM-tree). Acta Inform., 33:351–385, 1996.
[31] J. J. Pan, J. Wang, and G. Li. Survey of vector database management systems.
VLDB Journal, 2024.
[32] S. J. Subramanya, Devvrit, R. Kadekodi, R. Krishnaswamy, and H. V. Simhadri.
DiskANN: Fast accurate billion-point nearest neighbor search on a single node.
In NeurIPS 2019, November 2019.
[33] J. Sun, G. Li, and N. Tang. Learned cardinality estimation for similarity queries. In
Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD
’21, page 1745–1757, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[34] H. Wang, W. Wu, C. Luo, A. Bian, C. Meng, Y. Wu, and J. Sun. Boosting Accuracy
and Eciency for Vector Retrieval with Local Scaling Graph . In 2025 IEEE
41st International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pages 336–348, Los
Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2025. IEEE Computer Society.
[35] J. Wang, X. Yi, R. Guo, H. Jin, P. Xu, S. Li, X. Wang, X. Guo, C. Li, X. Xu, K. Yu,
Y. Yuan, Y. Zou, J. Long, Y. Cai, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Mo, J. Gu, R. Jiang, Y. Wei, and
C. Xie. Milvus: A purpose-built vector data management system. In SIGMOD,
pages 2614–2627, 2021.
[36] M. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Yue, and Y. Wang. A comprehensive survey and experimental
comparison of graph-based approximate nearest neighbor search. Proc. VLDB
Endow., 14(11):1964–1978, July 2021.
[37] W. Yang, T. Li, G. Fang, and H. Wei. PASE: PostgreSQL ultra-high-dimensional
approximate nearest neighbor search extension. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD ’20, page
2241–2253, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[38] Q. Zhang, S. Xu, Q. Chen, G. Sui, J. Xie, Z. Cai, Y. Chen, Y. He, Y. Yang, F. Yang,
M. Yang, and L. Zhou. VBASE: Unifying online vector similarity search and
relational queries via relaxed monotonicity. In 17th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23), pages 377–395, Boston,
MA, July 2023. USENIX Association.
[39] Y. Zhang, S. Liu, and J. Wang. Are there fundamental limitations in supporting
vector data management in relational databases? A case study of PostgreSQL. In
ICDE, 2024.

http://clickhouse.com.
http://elastic.co.
http://faiss.ai.
http://pinecone.io.
http://redis.io.
https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector.
http://weaviate.io.
A. Andoni, P. Indyk, T. Laarhoven, I. Razenshteyn, and L. Schmidt. Practical
and optimal lsh for angular distance. In Proceedings of the 28th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 1, NIPS’15, page
1225–1233, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2015. MIT Press.
[9] A. Andoni, P. Indyk, and I. Razenshteyn. Approximate nearest neighbor search
in high dimensions. In ICM, pages 3287–3318, 2018.
[10] M. Aumüller, E. Bernhardsson, and A. Faithfull. Ann-benchmarks: A benchmarking tool for approximate nearest neighbor algorithms. Inf. Syst., 87(C), Jan.
2020.
[11] F. Aurenhammer. Voronoi diagrams—a survey of a fundamental geometric data
structure. ACM Comput. Surv., 23(3):345–405, Sept. 1991.
[12] F. Bang. GPTCache: An open-source semantic cache for LLM applications enabling faster answers and cost savings. In L. Tan, D. Milajevs, G. Chauhan,
J. Gwinnup, and E. Rippeth, editors, Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop for Natural Language Processing Open Source Software (NLP-OSS 2023), pages 212–218,
Singapore, Dec. 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[13] O. Beaumont, A.-M. Kermarrec, L. Marchal, and E. Riviere. Voronet: A scalable
object network based on voronoi tessellations. In 2007 IEEE International Parallel
and Distributed Processing Symposium, pages 1–10, 2007.
[14] E. Chávez, G. Navarro, R. Baeza-Yates, and J. L. Marroquín. Searching in metric
spaces. ACM Comput. Surv., 33(3):273–321, 2001.
[15] C. Chen, C. Jin, Y. Zhang, S. Podolsky, C. Wu, S.-P. Wang, E. Hanson, Z. Sun,
R. Walzer, and J. Wang. SingleStore-V: An integrated vector database system in
SingleStore. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(12):3772–3785, 2024.
[16] L. Chen, M. Zaharia, and J. Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use large language models
while reducing cost and improving performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05176,
2023.
[17] Q. Chen, B. Zhao, H. Wang, M. Li, C. Liu, Z. Li, M. Yang, J. Wang, M. Yang, and
J. Wang. SPANN: Highly-ecient billion-scale approximate nearest neighbor
search. In NeurIPS 2021, 2021.
[18] M. Datar, N. Immorlica, P. Indyk, and V. S. Mirrokni. Locality-sensitive hashing
scheme based on p-stable distributions. In Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual
Symposium on Computational Geometry, SCG ’04, page 253–262, New York, NY,
USA, 2004. Association for Computing Machinery.
[19] M. Douze, A. Guzhva, C. Deng, J. Johnson, G. Szilvasy, P.-E. Mazaré, M. Lomeli,
L. Hosseini, and H. Jégou. The faiss library. 2024.
[20] J. Fan, Z. Pan, L. Wang, and Y. Wang. Codebook-softened product quantization for high accuracy approximate nearest neighbor search. Neurocomput.,
507(C):107–116, Oct. 2022.
[21] C. Fu, C. Xiang, C. Wang, and D. Cai. Fast approximate nearest neighbor search
with the navigating spreading-out graph. Proc. VLDB Endow., 12(5):461–474,
2019.
[22] S. Gollapudi, N. Karia, V. Sivashankar, R. Krishnaswamy, N. Begwani, S. Raz,
Y. Lin, Y. Zhang, N. Mahapatro, P. Srinivasan, A. Singh, and H. V. Simhadri.
Filtered-diskann: Graph algorithms for approximate nearest neighbor search
with lters. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, WWW ’23, page
3406–3416, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

4963
